cricket is a bat-and-ball game played between two teams of eleven players on a field at the centre of which is a 20-metre (22-yard) pitch with a wicket at each end, each comprising two bails balanced on three stumps. the batting side scores runs by striking the ball bowled at the wicket with the bat, while the bowling and fielding side tries to prevent this and dismiss each player (so they are "out"). means of dismissal include being bowled, when the ball hits the stumps and dislodges the bails, and by the fielding side catching the ball after it is hit by the bat, but before it hits the ground. when ten players have been dismissed, the innings ends and the teams swap roles. the game is adjudicated by two umpires, aided by a third umpire and match referee in international matches. they communicate with two off-field scorers who record the match's statistical information.
there are various formats ranging from twenty20, played over a few hours with each team batting for a single innings of 20 overs, to test matches, played over five days with unlimited overs and the teams each batting for two innings of unlimited length. traditionally cricketers play in all-white kit, but in limited overs cricket they wear club or team colours. in addition to the basic kit, some players wear protective gear to prevent injury caused by the ball, which is a hard, solid spheroid made of compressed leather with a slightly raised sewn seam enclosing a cork core which is layered with tightly wound string.
historically, cricket's origins are uncertain and the earliest definite reference is in south-east england in the middle of the 16th century. it spread globally with the expansion of the british empire, leading to the first international matches in the second half of the 19th century. the game's governing body is the international cricket council (icc), which has over 100 members, twelve of which are full members who play test matches. the game's rules are held in a code called the laws of cricket which is owned and maintained by marylebone cricket club (mcc) in london. the sport is followed primarily in the indian subcontinent, australasia, the united kingdom, ireland, southern africa and the west indies, its globalisation occurring during the expansion of the british empire and remaining popular into the 21st century. women's cricket, which is organised and played separately, has also achieved international standard. the most successful side playing international cricket is australia, having won seven one day international trophies, including five world cups, more than any other country, and having been the top-rated test side more than any other country.


history:


=origins:

cricket is one of many games in the "club ball" sphere that basically involve hitting a ball with a hand-held implement; others include baseball, golf, hockey, tennis, squash, badminton, and table tennis. in cricket's case, a key difference is the existence of a solid target structure, the wicket (originally, it is thought, a "wicket gate" through which sheep were herded), that the batsman must defend. the cricket historian harry altham identified three "groups" of "club ball" games: the "hockey group", in which the ball is driven to and fro between two targets (the goals); the "golf group", in which the ball is driven towards an undefended target (the hole); and the "cricket group", in which "the ball is aimed at a mark (the wicket) and driven away from it".it is generally believed that cricket originated as a children's game in the south-eastern counties of england, sometime during the medieval period. although there are claims for prior dates, the earliest definite reference to cricket being played comes from evidence given at a court case in guildford on monday, 17 january 1597 (julian calendar; equating to 30 january 1598 in the gregorian calendar). the case concerned ownership of a certain plot of land and the court heard the testimony of a 59-year-old coroner, john derrick, who gave witness that:
"being a scholler in the ffree schoole of guldeford hee and diverse of his fellows did runne and play there at creckett and other plaies".
given derrick's age, it was about half a century earlier when he was at school and so it is certain that cricket was being played c. 1550 by boys in surrey. the view that it was originally a children's game is reinforced by randle cotgrave's 1611 english-french dictionary in which he defined the noun "crosse" as "the crooked staff wherewith boys play at cricket" and the verb form "crosser" as "to play at cricket".one possible source for the sport's name is the old english word "cryce" (or "cricc") meaning a crutch or staff. in samuel johnson's dictionary, he derived cricket from "cryce, saxon, a stick". in old french, the word "criquet" seems to have meant a kind of club or stick. given the strong medieval trade connections between south-east england and the county of flanders when the latter belonged to the duchy of burgundy, the name may have been derived from the middle dutch (in use in flanders at the time) "krick"(-e), meaning a stick (crook). another possible source is the middle dutch word "krickstoel", meaning a long low stool used for kneeling in church and which resembled the long low wicket with two stumps used in early cricket. according to heiner gillmeister, a european language expert of bonn university, "cricket" derives from the middle dutch phrase for hockey, met de (krik ket)sen (i.e., "with the stick chase"). gillmeister has suggested that not only the name but also the sport itself may be of flemish origin.


=growth of amateur and professional cricket in england:

although the main object of the game has always been to score the most runs, the early form of cricket differed from the modern game in certain key technical aspects. the ball was bowled underarm by the bowler and all along the ground towards a batsman armed with a bat that, in shape, resembled a hockey stick; the batsman defended a low, two-stump wicket; and runs were called "notches" because the scorers recorded them by notching tally sticks.in 1611, the year cotgrave's dictionary was published, ecclesiastical court records at sidlesham in sussex state that two parishioners, bartholomew wyatt and richard latter, failed to attend church on easter sunday because they were playing cricket. they were fined 12d each and ordered to do penance. this is the earliest mention of adult participation in cricket and it was around the same time that the earliest known organised inter-parish or village match was played – at chevening, kent. in 1624, a player called jasper vinall died after he was accidentally struck on the head during a match between two parish teams in sussex.cricket remained a low-key local pursuit for much of the century. it is known, through numerous references found in the records of ecclesiastical court cases, to have been proscribed at times by the puritans before and during the commonwealth. the problem was nearly always the issue of sunday play as the puritans considered cricket to be "profane" if played on the sabbath, especially if large crowds and/or gambling were involved.according to the social historian derek birley, there was a "great upsurge of sport after the restoration" in 1660. gambling on sport became a problem significant enough for parliament to pass the 1664 gambling act, limiting stakes to £100 which was in any case a colossal sum exceeding the annual income of 99% of the population. along with prizefighting, horse racing and blood sports, cricket was perceived to be a gambling sport. rich patrons made matches for high stakes, forming teams in which they engaged the first professional players. by the end of the century, cricket had developed into a major sport which was spreading throughout england and was already being taken abroad by english mariners and colonisers – the earliest reference to cricket overseas is dated 1676. a 1697 newspaper report survives of "a great cricket match" played in sussex "for fifty guineas apiece" – this is the earliest known match that is generally considered top-class.the patrons, and other players from the social class known as the "gentry", began to classify themselves as "amateurs" to establish a clear distinction vis-à-vis the professionals, who were invariably members of the working class, even to the point of having separate changing and dining facilities. the gentry, including such high-ranking nobles as the dukes of richmond, exerted their honour code of noblesse oblige to claim rights of leadership in any sporting contests they took part in, especially as it was necessary for them to play alongside their "social inferiors" if they were to win their bets. in time, a perception took hold that the typical amateur who played in first-class cricket, until 1962 when amateurism was abolished, was someone with a public school education who had then gone to one of cambridge or oxford university – society insisted that such people were "officers and gentlemen" whose destiny was to provide leadership. in a purely financial sense, the cricketing amateur would theoretically claim expenses for playing while his professional counterpart played under contract and was paid a wage or match fee; in practice, many amateurs claimed somewhat more than actual expenditure and the derisive term "shamateur" was coined to describe the syndrome.


=english cricket in the 18th and 19th centuries:

the game underwent major development in the 18th century to become england's national sport. its success was underwritten by the twin necessities of patronage and betting. cricket was prominent in london as early as 1707 and, in the middle years of the century, large crowds flocked to matches on the artillery ground in finsbury. the single wicket form of the sport attracted huge crowds and wagers to match, its popularity peaking in the 1748 season. bowling underwent an evolution around 1760 when bowlers began to pitch the ball instead of rolling or skimming it towards the batsman. this caused a revolution in bat design because, to deal with the bouncing ball, it was necessary to introduce the modern straight bat in place of the old "hockey stick" shape.the hambledon club was founded in the 1760s and, for the next twenty years until the formation of marylebone cricket club (mcc) and the opening of lord's old ground in 1787, hambledon was both the game's greatest club and its focal point. mcc quickly became the sport's premier club and the custodian of the laws of cricket. new laws introduced in the latter part of the 18th century included the three stump wicket and leg before wicket (lbw).the 19th century saw underarm bowling superseded by first roundarm and then overarm bowling. both developments were controversial. organisation of the game at county level led to the creation of the county clubs, starting with sussex in 1839. in december 1889, the eight leading county clubs formed the official county championship, which began in 1890.the most famous player of the 19th century was w. g. grace, who started his long and influential career in 1865. it was especially during the career of grace that the distinction between amateurs and professionals became blurred by the existence of players like him who were nominally amateur but, in terms of their financial gain, de facto professional. grace himself was said to have been paid more money for playing cricket than any professional.the last two decades before the first world war have been called the "golden age of cricket". it is a nostalgic name prompted by the collective sense of loss resulting from the war, but the period did produce some great players and memorable matches, especially as organised competition at county and test level developed.


=cricket becomes an international sport:

meanwhile, the british empire had been instrumental in spreading the game overseas and by the middle of the 19th century it had become well established in australia, the caribbean, india, new zealand, north america and south africa. in 1844, the first-ever international match took place between the united states and canada. in 1859, a team of english players went to north america on the first overseas tour.in 1862, an english team made the first tour of australia. the first australian team to travel overseas consisted of aboriginal stockmen who toured england in 1868.in 1876–77, an england team took part in what was retrospectively recognised as the first-ever test match at the melbourne cricket ground against australia. the rivalry between england and australia gave birth to the ashes in 1882 and this has remained test cricket's most famous contest. test cricket began to expand in 1888–89 when south africa played england.


=world cricket in the 20th century:

the inter-war years were dominated by australia's don bradman, statistically the greatest test batsman of all time. test cricket continued to expand during the 20th century with the addition of the west indies (1928), new zealand (1930) and india (1932) before the second world war and then pakistan (1952), sri lanka (1982), zimbabwe (1992) and bangladesh (2000) in the post-war period. south africa was banned from international cricket from 1970 to 1992 as part of the apartheid boycott.


=the rise of limited overs cricket:
cricket entered a new era in 1963 when english counties introduced the limited overs variant. as it was sure to produce a result, limited overs cricket was lucrative and the number of matches increased. the first limited overs international was played in 1971 and the governing international cricket council (icc), seeing its potential, staged the first limited overs cricket world cup in 1975. in the 21st century, a new limited overs form, twenty20, made an immediate impact. on 22 june 2017, afghanistan and ireland became the 11th and 12th icc full members, enabling them to play test cricket.


laws and gameplay:

in cricket, the rules of the game are specified in a code called the laws of cricket (hereinafter called "the laws") which has a global remit. there are 42 laws (always written with a capital "l"). the earliest known version of the code was drafted in 1744 and, since 1788, it has been owned and maintained by its custodian, the marylebone cricket club (mcc) in london.


=playing area:

cricket is a bat-and-ball game played on a cricket field (see image, right) between two teams of eleven players each. the field is usually circular or oval in shape and the edge of the playing area is marked by a boundary, which may be a fence, part of the stands, a rope, a painted line or a combination of these; the boundary must if possible be marked along its entire length.in the approximate centre of the field is a rectangular pitch (see image, below) on which a wooden target called a wicket is sited at each end; the wickets are placed 22 yards (20 m) apart. the pitch is a flat surface 3 metres (9.8 ft) wide, with very short grass that tends to be worn away as the game progresses (cricket can also be played on artificial surfaces, notably matting). each wicket is made of three wooden stumps topped by two bails.

as illustrated above, the pitch is marked at each end with four white painted lines: a bowling crease, a popping crease and two return creases. the three stumps are aligned centrally on the bowling crease, which is eight feet eight inches long. the popping crease is drawn four feet in front of the bowling crease and parallel to it; although it is drawn as a twelve-foot line (six feet either side of the wicket), it is in fact unlimited in length. the return creases are drawn at right angles to the popping crease so that they intersect the ends of the bowling crease; each return crease is drawn as an eight-foot line, so that it extends four feet behind the bowling crease, but is also in fact unlimited in length.


=match structure and closure:

before a match begins, the team captains (who are also players) toss a coin to decide which team will bat first and so take the first innings. innings is the term used for each phase of play in the match. in each innings, one team bats, attempting to score runs, while the other team bowls and fields the ball, attempting to restrict the scoring and dismiss the batsmen. when the first innings ends, the teams change roles; there can be two to four innings depending upon the type of match. a match with four scheduled innings is played over three to five days; a match with two scheduled innings is usually completed in a single day. during an innings, all eleven members of the fielding team take the field, but only two members of the batting team are on the field at any given time. the order of batsmen is usually announced just before the match, but it can be varied.the main objective of each team is to score more runs than their opponents but, in some forms of cricket, it is also necessary to dismiss all of the opposition batsmen in their final innings in order to win the match, which would otherwise be drawn. if the team batting last is all out having scored fewer runs than their opponents, they are said to have "lost by n runs" (where n is the difference between the aggregate number of runs scored by the teams). if the team that bats last scores enough runs to win, it is said to have "won by n wickets", where n is the number of wickets left to fall. for example, a team that passes its opponents' total having lost six wickets (i.e., six of their batsmen have been dismissed) have won the match "by four wickets".in a two-innings-a-side match, one team's combined first and second innings total may be less than the other side's first innings total. the team with the greater score is then said to have "won by an innings and n runs", and does not need to bat again: n is the difference between the two teams' aggregate scores. if the team batting last is all out, and both sides have scored the same number of runs, then the match is a tie; this result is quite rare in matches of two innings a side with only 62 happening in first-class matches from the earliest known instance in 1741 until january 2017. in the traditional form of the game, if the time allotted for the match expires before either side can win, then the game is declared a draw.if the match has only a single innings per side, then a maximum number of overs applies to each innings. such a match is called a "limited overs" or "one-day" match, and the side scoring more runs wins regardless of the number of wickets lost, so that a draw cannot occur. if this kind of match is temporarily interrupted by bad weather, then a complex mathematical formula, known as the duckworth-lewis method after its developers, is often used to recalculate a new target score. a one-day match can also be declared a "no-result" if fewer than a previously agreed number of overs have been bowled by either team, in circumstances that make normal resumption of play impossible; for example, wet weather.in all forms of cricket, the umpires can abandon the match if bad light or rain makes it impossible to continue. there have been instances of entire matches, even test matches scheduled to be played over five days, being lost to bad weather without a ball being bowled: for example, the third test of the 1970/71 series in australia.


=bat and ball:

the essence of the sport is that a bowler delivers (i.e., bowls) the ball from his end of the pitch towards the batsman who, armed with a bat is "on strike" at the other end (see next sub-section: basic gameplay).
the bat is made of wood, usually salix alba (white willow), and has the shape of a blade topped by a cylindrical handle. the blade must not be more than four and one quarter inches (108 mm) wide and the total length of the bat not more than 38 inches (965 mm). there is no standard for the weight which is usually between 2 lb 7 oz and 3 lb (1.1 and 1.4 kg).the ball is a hard leather-seamed spheroid, with a circumference of 22.9 centimetres (9.0 in). the ball has a "seam": six rows of stitches attaching the leather shell of the ball to the string and cork interior. the seam on a new ball is prominent, and helps the bowler propel it in a less predictable manner. during matches, the quality of the ball deteriorates to a point where it is no longer usable, and during the course of this deterioration its behaviour in flight will change and can influence the outcome of the match. players will therefore attempt to modify the ball's behaviour by modifying its physical properties. polishing the ball and wetting it with sweat or saliva is legal, even when the polishing is deliberately done on one side only to increase the ball's swing through the air, but the acts of rubbing other substances into the ball, scratching the surface or picking at the seam is illegal ball tampering.


=basic gameplay: bowler to batsman:
during normal play, thirteen players and two umpires are on the field. two of the players are batsmen and the rest are all eleven members of the fielding team. the other nine players in the batting team are off the field in the pavilion. the image with overlay below shows what is happening when a ball is being bowled and which of the personnel are on or close to the pitch. the photo was taken during an international match between australia and sri lanka; muttiah muralitharan of sri lanka is bowling to australian batsman adam gilchrist.

in the photo, the two batsmen (3 & 8; wearing yellow) have taken position at each end of the pitch (6). three members of the fielding team (4, 10 & 11; wearing dark blue) are in shot. one of the two umpires (1; wearing white hat) is stationed behind the wicket (2) at the bowler's (4) end of the pitch. the bowler (4) is bowling the ball (5) from his end of the pitch to the batsman (8) at the other end who is called the "striker". the other batsman (3) at the bowling end is called the "non-striker". the wicket-keeper (10), who is a specialist, is positioned behind the striker's wicket (9) and behind him stands one of the fielders in a position called "first slip" (11). while the bowler and the first slip are wearing conventional kit only, the two batsmen and the wicket-keeper are wearing protective gear including safety helmets, padded gloves and leg guards (pads).
while the umpire (1) in shot stands at the bowler's end of the pitch, his colleague stands in the outfield, usually in or near the fielding position called "square leg", so that he is in line with the popping crease (7) at the striker's end of the pitch. the bowling crease (not numbered) is the one on which the wicket is located between the return creases (12). the bowler (4) intends to hit the wicket (9) with the ball (5) or, at least, to prevent the striker (8) from scoring runs. the striker (8) intends, by using his bat, to defend his wicket and, if possible, to hit the ball away from the pitch in order to score runs.
some players are skilled in both batting and bowling so are termed all-rounders. adam gilchrist, pictured above, was a wicket-keeper/batsman, another type of all-rounder. bowlers are also classified according to their style, generally as fast bowlers, medium pace seam bowlers or, like muttiah muralitharan pictured above, spinners. batsmen are classified according to whether they are right-handed or left-handed.


=fielding:

of the eleven fielders, three are in shot in the image above. the other eight are elsewhere on the field, their positions determined on a tactical basis by the captain or the bowler. fielders often change position between deliveries, again as directed by the captain or bowler.if a fielder is injured or becomes ill during a match, a substitute is allowed to field instead of him, but the substitute cannot bowl or act as a captain. the substitute leaves the field when the injured player is fit to return. the laws of cricket were updated in 2017 to allow substitutes to act as wicket-keepers, a situation that first occurred when mumbai indians' wicket-keeper ishan kishan was injured in a match on 18 april 2018.


=specialist roles:

the captain is often the most experienced player in the team, certainly the most tactically astute, and can possess any of the main skillsets as a batsman, a bowler or a wicket-keeper. within the laws, the captain has certain responsibilities in terms of nominating his players to the umpires before the match and ensuring that his players conduct themselves "within the spirit and traditions of the game as well as within the laws".the wicket-keeper (sometimes called simply the "keeper") is a specialist fielder subject to various rules within the laws about his equipment and demeanour. he is the only member of the fielding side who can effect a stumping and is the only one permitted to wear gloves and external leg guards. depending on their primary skills, the other ten players in the team tend to be classified as specialist batsmen or specialist bowlers. generally, a team will include five or six specialist batsmen and four or five specialist bowlers, plus the wicket-keeper.


=clothing and equipment:

the wicket-keeper and the batsmen wear protective gear because of the hardness of the ball, which can be delivered at speeds of more than 145 kilometres per hour (90 mph) and presents a major health and safety concern. protective clothing includes pads (designed to protect the knees and shins), batting gloves or wicket-keeper's gloves for the hands, a safety helmet for the head and a box for male players inside the trousers (to protect the crotch area). some batsmen wear additional padding inside their shirts and trousers such as thigh pads, arm pads, rib protectors and shoulder pads. the only fielders allowed to wear protective gear are those in positions very close to the batsman (i.e., if they are alongside or in front of him), but they cannot wear gloves or external leg guards.subject to certain variations, on-field clothing generally includes a collared shirt with short or long sleeves; long trousers; woollen pullover (if needed); cricket cap (for fielding) or a safety helmet; and spiked shoes or boots to increase traction. the kit is traditionally all white and this remains the case in test and first-class cricket but, in limited overs cricket, team colours are worn instead.


=innings:

the innings (ending with 's' in both singular and plural form) is the term used for each phase of play during a match. depending on the type of match being played, each team has either one or two innings. sometimes all eleven members of the batting side take a turn to bat but, for various reasons, an innings can end before they have all done so. the innings terminates if the batting team is "all out", a term defined by the laws: "at the fall of a wicket or the retirement of a batsman, further balls remain to be bowled but no further batsman is available to come in". in this situation, one of the batsman has not been dismissed and is termed not out; this is because he has no partners left and there must always be two active batsmen while the innings is in progress.
an innings may end early while there are still two not out batsmen:
the batting team's captain may declare the innings closed even though some of his players have not had a turn to bat: this is a tactical decision by the captain, usually because he believes his team have scored sufficient runs and need time to dismiss the opposition in their innings
the set number of overs (i.e., in a limited overs match) have been bowled
the match has ended prematurely due to bad weather or running out of time
in the final innings of the match, the batting side has reached its target and won the game.


=overs:

the laws state that, throughout an innings, "the ball shall be bowled from each end alternately in overs of 6 balls". the name "over" came about because the umpire calls "over!" when six balls have been bowled. at this point, another bowler is deployed at the other end, and the fielding side changes ends while the batsmen do not. a bowler cannot bowl two successive overs, although a bowler can (and usually does) bowl alternate overs, from the same end, for several overs which are termed a "spell". the batsmen do not change ends at the end of the over, and so the one who was non-striker is now the striker and vice-versa. the umpires also change positions so that the one who was at "square leg" now stands behind the wicket at the non-striker's end and vice-versa.


=umpires and scorers:

the game on the field is regulated by the two umpires, one of whom stands behind the wicket at the bowler's end, the other in a position called "square leg" which is about 15–20 metres away from the batsman on strike and in line with the popping crease on which he is taking guard. the umpires have several responsibilities including adjudication on whether a ball has been correctly bowled (i.e., not a no-ball or a wide); when a run is scored; whether a batsman is out (the fielding side must first appeal to the umpire, usually with the phrase "how's that?" or "owzat?"); when intervals start and end; and the suitability of the pitch, field and weather for playing the game. the umpires are authorised to interrupt or even abandon a match due to circumstances likely to endanger the players, such as a damp pitch or deterioration of the light.off the field in televised matches, there is usually a third umpire who can make decisions on certain incidents with the aid of video evidence. the third umpire is mandatory under the playing conditions for test and limited overs international matches played between two icc full member countries. these matches also have a match referee whose job is to ensure that play is within the laws and the spirit of the game.the match details, including runs and dismissals, are recorded by two official scorers, one representing each team. the scorers are directed by the hand signals of an umpire (see image, right). for example, the umpire raises a forefinger to signal that the batsman is out (has been dismissed); he raises both arms above his head if the batsman has hit the ball for six runs. the scorers are required by the laws to record all runs scored, wickets taken and overs bowled; in practice, they also note significant amounts of additional data relating to the game.a match's statistics are summarised on a scorecard. prior to the popularisation of scorecards, most scoring was done by men sitting on vantage points cuttings notches on tally sticks and runs were originally called notches. according to rowland bowen, the earliest known scorecard templates were introduced in 1776 by t. pratt of sevenoaks and soon came into general use. it is believed that scorecards were printed and sold at lord's for the first time in 1846.


=spirit of the game:

besides observing the laws, cricketers must respect the "spirit of cricket," which is the "preamble to the laws," first published in the 2000 code, and updated in 2017, and now opens with this statement:
"cricket owes much of its appeal and enjoyment to the fact that it should be played not only according to the laws, but also within the spirit of cricket".
the preamble is a short statement that emphasises the "positive behaviours that make cricket an exciting game that encourages leadership,friendship and teamwork."the major responsibility for ensuring fair play is placed firmly on the captains, but extends to all players, umpires, teachers, coaches and parents involved.
the umpires are the sole judges of fair and unfair play. they are required under the laws to intervene in case of dangerous or unfair play or in cases of unacceptable conduct by a player.
previous versions of the spirit identified actions that were deemed contrary (for example, appealing knowing that the batsman is not out) but all specifics are now covered in the laws of cricket, the relevant governing playing regulations and disciplinary codes, or left to the judgement of the umpires, captains, their clubs and governing bodies. the terse expression of the spirit of cricket now avoids the diversity of cultural conventions that exist on the detail of sportsmanship – or its absence.


=bowling and dismissal:

most bowlers are considered specialists in that they are selected for the team because of their skill as a bowler, although some are all-rounders and even specialist batsmen bowl occasionally. the specialist bowlers are active multiple times during an innings, but may not bowl two overs consecutively. if the captain wants a bowler to "change ends", another bowler must temporarily fill in so that the change is not immediate.a bowler reaches his delivery stride by means of a "run-up" and an over is deemed to have begun when the bowler starts his run-up for the first delivery of that over, the ball then being "in play". fast bowlers, needing momentum, take a lengthy run up while bowlers with a slow delivery take no more than a couple of steps before bowling. the fastest bowlers can deliver the ball at a speed of over 145 kilometres per hour (90 mph) and they sometimes rely on sheer speed to try and defeat the batsman, who is forced to react very quickly. other fast bowlers rely on a mixture of speed and guile by making the ball seam or swing (i.e. curve) in flight. this type of delivery can deceive a batsman into miscuing his shot, for example, so that the ball just touches the edge of the bat and can then be "caught behind" by the wicket-keeper or a slip fielder. at the other end of the bowling scale is the spin bowler who bowls at a relatively slow pace and relies entirely on guile to deceive the batsman. a spinner will often "buy his wicket" by "tossing one up" (in a slower, steeper parabolic path) to lure the batsman into making a poor shot. the batsman has to be very wary of such deliveries as they are often "flighted" or spun so that the ball will not behave quite as he expects and he could be "trapped" into getting himself out. in between the pacemen and the spinners are the medium paced seamers who rely on persistent accuracy to try and contain the rate of scoring and wear down the batsman's concentration.there are ten ways in which a batsman can be dismissed: five relatively common and five extremely rare. the common forms of dismissal are bowled, caught, leg before wicket (lbw), run out and stumped. rare methods are hit wicket, hit the ball twice, obstructing the field, handled the ball and timed out. the laws state that the fielding team, usually the bowler in practice, must appeal for a dismissal before the umpire can give his decision. if the batsman is out, the umpire raises a forefinger and says "out!"; otherwise, he will shake his head and say "not out". there is, effectively, an eleventh method of dismissal, retired out, which is not an on-field dismissal as such but rather a retrospective one for which no fielder is credited.


=batting, runs and extras:

batsmen take turns to bat via a batting order which is decided beforehand by the team captain and presented to the umpires, though the order remains flexible when the captain officially nominates the team. substitute batsmen are not allowed.a skilled batsman can use a wide array of "shots" or "strokes" in both defensive and attacking mode. the idea is to hit the ball to best effect with the flat surface of the bat's blade. if the ball touches the side of the bat it is called an "edge". the batsman does not have to play a shot and can allow the ball to go through to the wicketkeeper. equally, he does not have to attempt a run when he hits the ball with his bat. batsmen do not always seek to hit the ball as hard as possible, and a good player can score runs just by making a deft stroke with a turn of the wrists or by simply "blocking" the ball but directing it away from fielders so that he has time to take a run. a wide variety of shots are played, the batsman's repertoire including strokes named according to the style of swing and the direction aimed: e.g., "cut", "drive", "hook", "pull".the batsman on strike (i.e. the "striker") must prevent the ball hitting the wicket, and try to score runs by hitting the ball with his bat so that he and his partner have time to run from one end of the pitch to the other before the fielding side can return the ball. to register a run, both runners must touch the ground behind the popping crease with either their bats or their bodies (the batsmen carry their bats as they run). each completed run increments the score of both the team and the striker.

the decision to attempt a run is ideally made by the batsman who has the better view of the ball's progress, and this is communicated by calling: usually "yes", "no" or "wait". more than one run can be scored from a single hit: hits worth one to three runs are common, but the size of the field is such that it is usually difficult to run four or more. to compensate for this, hits that reach the boundary of the field are automatically awarded four runs if the ball touches the ground en route to the boundary or six runs if the ball clears the boundary without touching the ground within the boundary. in these cases the batsmen do not need to run. hits for five are unusual and generally rely on the help of "overthrows" by a fielder returning the ball. if an odd number of runs is scored by the striker, the two batsmen have changed ends, and the one who was non-striker is now the striker. only the striker can score individual runs, but all runs are added to the team's total.additional runs can be gained by the batting team as extras (called "sundries" in australia) due to errors made by the fielding side. this is achieved in four ways: no-ball, a penalty of one extra conceded by the bowler if he breaks the rules; wide, a penalty of one extra conceded by the bowler if he bowls so that the ball is out of the batsman's reach; bye, an extra awarded if the batsman misses the ball and it goes past the wicket-keeper and gives the batsmen time to run in the conventional way; leg bye, as for a bye except that the ball has hit the batsman's body, though not his bat. if the bowler has conceded a no-ball or a wide, his team incurs an additional penalty because that ball (i.e., delivery) has to be bowled again and hence the batting side has the opportunity to score more runs from this extra ball.


women's cricket:

women's cricket was first recorded in surrey in 1745. international development began at the start of the 20th century and the first test match was played between australia and england in december 1934. the following year, new zealand women joined them, and in 2007 netherlands women became the tenth women's test nation when they made their debut against south africa women. in 1958, the international women's cricket council was founded (it merged with the icc in 2005). in 1973, the first cricket world cup of any kind took place when a women's world cup was held in england.  in 2005, the international women's cricket council was merged with the international cricket council (icc) to form one unified body to help manage and develop cricket. the icc women's rankings were launched on 1 october 2015 covering all three formats of women's cricket. in october 2018 following the icc's decision to award t20 international status to all members, the women's rankings were split into separate odi (for full members) and t20i lists.


governance:

the international cricket council (icc), which has its headquarters in dubai, is the global governing body of cricket. it was founded as the imperial cricket conference in 1909 by representatives from england, australia and south africa, renamed the international cricket conference in 1965, and took up its current name in 1989. the icc in 2017 has 105 member nations, twelve of which hold full membership and can play test cricket. the icc is responsible for the organisation and governance of cricket's major international tournaments, notably the men's and women's versions of the cricket world cup. it also appoints the umpires and referees that officiate at all sanctioned test matches, limited overs internationals and twenty20 internationals.
each member nation has a national cricket board which regulates cricket matches played in its country, selects the national squad, and organises home and away tours for the national team. in the west indies, which for cricket purposes is a federation of nations, these matters are addressed by cricket west indies.the table below lists the icc full members and their national cricket boards:


types of match:

cricket is a multi-faceted sport with multiple formats that can effectively be divided into first-class cricket, limited overs cricket and, historically, single wicket cricket. the highest standard is test cricket (always written with a capital "t") which is in effect the international version of first-class cricket and is restricted to teams representing the twelve countries that are full members of the icc (see above). although the term "test match" was not coined until much later, test cricket is deemed to have begun with two matches between australia and england in the 1876–77 australian season; since 1882, most test series between england and australia have been played for a trophy known as the ashes. the term "first-class", in general usage, is applied to top-level domestic cricket. test matches are played over five days and first-class over three to four days; in all of these matches, the teams are allotted two innings each and the draw is a valid result.limited overs cricket is always scheduled for completion in a single day. there are two types: list a which normally allows fifty overs per team; and twenty20 in which the teams have twenty overs each. both of the limited overs forms are played internationally as limited overs internationals (loi) and twenty20 internationals (t20i). list a was introduced in england in the 1963 season as a knockout cup contested by the first-class county clubs. in 1969, a national league competition was established. the concept was gradually introduced to the other leading cricket countries and the first limited overs international was played in 1971. in 1975, the first cricket world cup took place in england. twenty20 is a new variant of limited overs itself with the purpose being to complete the match within about three hours, usually in an evening session. the first twenty20 world championship was held in 2007. limited overs matches cannot be drawn, although a tie is possible and an unfinished match is a "no result".single wicket was popular in the 18th and 19th centuries and its matches were generally considered top-class. in this form, although each team may have from one to six players, there is only one batsman in at a time and he must face every delivery bowled while his innings lasts. single wicket has rarely been played since limited overs cricket began. matches tended to have two innings per team like a full first-class one and they could end in a draw.


international competitions:

most international matches are played as parts of 'tours', when one nation travels to another for a number of weeks or months, and plays a number of matches of various sorts against the host nation. sometimes a perpetual trophy is awarded to the winner of the test series, the most famous of which is the ashes.
the icc also organises competitions that are for several countries at once, including the cricket world cup, icc t20 world cup and icc champions trophy. a league competition for test matches played as part of normal tours, the icc world test championship, has been proposed several times, and is currently planned to begin in 2019. a league competition for odis, the 2020–22 icc cricket world cup super league, is planned to begin in 2020. the icc maintains test rankings, odi rankings and t20 rankings systems for the countries which play these forms of cricket.
competitions for member nations of the icc with associate status include the icc intercontinental cup, for first-class cricket matches, and the world cricket league for one-day matches, the final matches of which now also serve as the icc world cup qualifier.


national competitions:


=first-class:

first-class cricket in england is played for the most part by the 18 county clubs which contest the county championship. the concept of a champion county has existed since the 18th century but the official competition was not established until 1890. the most successful club has been yorkshire, who had won 32 official titles (plus one shared) as of 2019.australia established its national first-class championship in 1892–93 when the sheffield shield was introduced. in australia, the first-class teams represent the various states. new south wales has the highest number of titles.
the other icc full members have national championship trophies called the ahmad shah abdali 4-day tournament (afghanistan); the national cricket league (bangladesh); the ranji trophy (india); the inter-provincial championship (ireland); the plunket shield (new zealand); the quaid-e-azam trophy (pakistan); the currie cup (south africa); the premier trophy (sri lanka); the shell shield (west indies); and the logan cup (zimbabwe).


=limited overs:


=other:


club and school cricket:

the world's earliest known cricket match was a village cricket meeting in kent which has been deduced from a 1640 court case recording a "cricketing" of "the weald and the upland" versus "the chalk hill" at chevening "about thirty years since" (i.e., c. 1611). inter-parish contests became popular in the first half of the 17th century and continued to develop through the 18th with the first local leagues being founded in the second half of the 19th.at the grassroots level, local club cricket is essentially an amateur pastime for those involved but still usually involves teams playing in competitions at weekends or in the evening. schools cricket, first known in southern england in the 17th century, has a similar scenario and both are widely played in the countries where cricket is popular. although there can be variations in game format, compared with professional cricket, the laws are always observed and club/school matches are therefore formal and competitive events. the sport has numerous informal variants such as french cricket.


culture:


=influence on everyday life:
cricket has had a broad impact on popular culture, both in the commonwealth of nations and elsewhere. it has, for example, influenced the lexicon of these nations, especially the english language, with various phrases such as "that's not cricket" (that's unfair), "had a good innings" (lived a long life) and "sticky wicket". "on a sticky wicket" (aka "sticky dog" or "glue pot") is a metaphor used to describe a difficult circumstance. it originated as a term for difficult batting conditions in cricket, caused by a damp and soft pitch.


=in the arts and popular culture:

cricket is the subject of works by noted english poets, including william blake and lord byron. beyond a boundary (1963), written by trinidadian c. l. r. james, is often named the best book on any sport ever written.

in the visual arts, notable cricket paintings include albert chevallier tayler's kent vs lancashire at canterbury (1907) and russell drysdale's the cricketers (1948), which has been called "possibly the most famous australian painting of the 20th century." french impressionist camille pissarro painted cricket on a visit to england in the 1890s. francis bacon, an avid cricket fan, captured a batsman in motion. caribbean artist wendy nanan's cricket images are featured in a limited edition first day cover for royal mail's "world of invention" stamp issue, which celebrated the london cricket conference 1–3 march 2007, first international workshop of its kind and part of the celebrations leading up to the 2007 cricket world cup.


=influence on other sports:
cricket has close historical ties with australian rules football and many players have competed at top levels in both sports. in 1858, prominent australian cricketer tom wills called for the formation of a "foot-ball club" with "a code of laws" to keep cricketers fit during the off-season. the melbourne football club was founded the following year, and wills and three other members codified the first laws of the game. it is typically played on modified cricket fields.in england, a number of association football clubs owe their origins to cricketers who sought to play football as a means of keeping fit during the winter months. derby county was founded as a branch of the derbyshire county cricket club in 1884; aston villa (1874) and everton (1876) were both founded by members of church cricket teams. sheffield united's bramall lane ground was, from 1854, the home of the sheffield cricket club, and then of yorkshire; it was not used for football until 1862 and was shared by yorkshire and sheffield united from 1889 to 1973.in the late 19th century, a former cricketer, english-born henry chadwick of brooklyn, new york, was credited with devising the baseball box score (which he adapted from the cricket scorecard) for reporting game events. the first box score appeared in an 1859 issue of the clipper. the statistical record is so central to the game's "historical essence" that chadwick is sometimes referred to as "the father of baseball" because he facilitated the popularity of the sport in its early days.


see also:

glossary of cricket termsrelated sports

baseball
stoolball


footnotes:


references:


sources:


further reading:
guha, ramachandra (2002). a corner of a foreign field – the indian history of a british sport. london: picador. isbn 0-330-49117-2.


external links:

organisations and competitions

international cricket council (icc)statistics and records

espncricinfonews and other resources

"cricket". encyclopædia britannica onlinethe 2011 icc cricket world cup (officially known as icc cricket world cup 2011) was the tenth cricket world cup. it was played in india, sri lanka, and (for the first time) bangladesh. india won the tournament, defeating sri lanka by 6 wickets in the final at wankhede stadium in mumbai, thus becoming the first country to win the cricket world cup final on home soil. india's yuvraj singh was declared the man of the tournament. this was the first time in world cup history that two asian teams had appeared in the final. it was also the first time since the 1992 world cup that the final match did not feature australia.
all the matches were one day internationals, and all were played over 50 overs. fourteen national cricket teams took part, including 10 full members and four associate members of the icc. the opening ceremony was held on 17 february 2011 at bangabandhu national stadium, dhaka, and the tournament was played between 19 february and 2 april. the first match was played between india and bangladesh at the sher-e-bangla national stadium in mirpur, dhaka. it is the most viewed world cup edition ever with 2.2 billion worldwide viewers.
pakistan was also scheduled to be a co-host, but after the 2009 attack on the sri lanka national cricket team in lahore, the international cricket council (icc) cancelled that, and the headquarters of the organising committee, originally in lahore, was transferred to mumbai. pakistan was to have held 14 matches, including one semi-final. eight of the games (including the semi-final) were awarded to india, four to sri lanka, and two to bangladesh.


host selection:
the icc announced on 30 april 2006 which countries would host the 2011 world cup. australia and new zealand had also bid for the tournament; if successful, they would have shared the hosting equally, leaving the location of the final still to be decided. the trans–tasman bid, beyond boundaries, was the only one delivered to the icc headquarters in dubai before the 1 march deadline, but the asian bidders were granted an extension by the icc. the new zealand government had given assurance that zimbabwe would be allowed to compete in the tournament, following political discussions in the country over whether their cricket team should be allowed to tour zimbabwe in 2005.the extra time needed for the asian bid had weakened its prospects, but when the time came to vote, asia won the hosting rights by ten votes to three. the pakistan cricket board (pcb) has revealed that the vote of the west indies cricket board was decisive, as the asian bid had the support of south africa and zimbabwe as well as the four bidding countries. the pakistani newspaper dawn reported that the asian countries had promised to hold fund-raising events for west indian cricket during the 2007 world cup, which may have influenced the vote. however, i. s. bindra, chairman of the monitoring committee of the asian bid, said that their promise of extra profits of around us$400 million had been decisive, that there "was no quid pro quo for their support", and that playing the west indies had "nothing to do with the world cup bid".


format:
late in 2007, the four host nations agreed on a revised format for the 2011 world cup, identical to that of the 1996 world cup, except that there would be 14 teams instead of 12. the first round of the tournament would consist of two groups of seven teams. each team in a group would play all the others once, and the top four from each group would qualify for the quarter-finals. this ensured that every team would play at least six matches.


qualification:

as per icc regulations, all 10 full members automatically qualify for the world cup, including zimbabwe who have given up their test playing status until the standard of their team improves.the icc also organised a qualifying tournament in south africa to determine the four associate teams who would participate in the 2011 event. ireland, who had been the best performing associate nation since the last world cup, won the tournament, beating canada in the final. the netherlands and kenya also qualified by virtue of finishing third and fourth respectively. all 4 associates kept their odi status as well as scotland who this time failed to qualify for the world cup.


=list of qualified teams:
the following 14 teams qualified for the final tournament.


preparations:


=pakistan loses co-host status:
in april 2009 the icc announced that pakistan had lost its right to co-host the 2011 world cup because of concerns about the "uncertain security situation" in the country, especially in the aftermath of the 2009 attack on the sri lanka national cricket team in lahore. the pcb estimated that this would lose them $10.5 million. this figure took account only of the fees of $750,000 per match guaranteed by the icc. the overall loss to the pcb and the pakistani economy were expected to be much greater.
on 9 april 2009 pcb chairman ijaz butt revealed that they had issued a legal notice to oppose icc's decision. the icc, however, claimed that the pcb was still a co-host, and that they had only relocated the matches out of pakistan. pakistan proposed that south asia host the 2015 world cup and that australia and new zealand host the 2011 event, but this option did not find favour with their co-hosts and was not implemented.


=allocation of matches:
on 11 april 2005 pcb chairman shaharyar khan announced an agreement on the allocation of games, under which india would host the final, pakistan and sri lanka the semi-finals, and bangladesh the opening ceremony. after being stripped of its status as a co-host, pakistan proposed to host its allocated games in the united arab emirates as a neutral venue. they had played matches in abu dhabi, dubai, and sharjah in the preceding months. on 28 april 2009, however, the icc announced that matches originally intended to be played in pakistan would be reallocated. as a result, india hosted 29 matches across eight venues, including the final and one semi-final; sri lanka hosted 12 matches at three venues, including one semi-final; and bangladesh hosted 8 matches at two grounds, as well as the opening ceremony on 17 february 2011.on 1 june 2010 the first tranche of tickets were put on sale after a meeting of the tournament's central organising committee in mumbai. the cheapest tickets cost 20 us cents in sri lanka. in january 2011 the icc declared the eden gardens ground in kolkata, india, to be unfit and unlikely to be complete by 27 february, when it was scheduled to host a match between india and england. the match was moved to bangalore.


=media and promotion:

the world cup has grown as a media event with each tournament. the icc sold the broadcasting rights for the 2011 event to espn star sports and star cricket for around us$2 billion. for the first time, the tournament was broadcast in high-definition format, and it was to be covered by at least 27 cameras using recent technology. it was also planned to be shown across platforms such as online and mobile 3g. it was the first time that an icc event had the umpire decision review system (udrs).the final was watched live by 135 million people in india, as recorded by the ratings agencies tam and amap, including 67.6 million indian cable and satellite viewers. the final was watched by 13.6% of indian tv-equipped households on average, with a peak of 21.44% at the end of the game, thus beating the semi-final between india and pakistan, which had an estimated 11.74% tv rating in india for the whole match. the event was televised in 200 countries with over 2.2 billion viewers, highest for any edition of a cricket world cup.
the official event ambassador was sachin tendulkar.


==song:=
the official song of the 2011 cricket world cup has three versions, in bengali, hindi, and sinhala, corresponding to the three host countries. "de ghuma ke" (swing it hard) is the hindi version, composed by the trio of shankar–ehsaan–loy. it employs an array of indian rhythms combined with elements of rock and hip hop. the sinhala version, "sinha udaane", was adapted by sri lankan r&b and hip hop artist ranidu lankage and composed by lyricist shehan galahitiyawa. both songs were performed at the opening ceremony. "sinha udaane" was performed by lankage.


==mascot:=
stumpy, a young elephant, was the official mascot for the 2011 cricket world cup. he was unveiled at a function in colombo, sri lanka, on 2 april 2010, and his name was revealed on 2 august 2010 after an online competition conducted by the icc in the last week of july.


opening ceremony:

the opening ceremony was held in the bangabandhu national stadium in dhaka, bangladesh, on 17 february 2011, two days before the first match.


prize money:
the 2011 cricket world cup winning team would be taking home a prize money of us$3 million and us$1.5 million for runner-up, with the international cricket council deciding to double the total allocation for the tournament to us$8.01 million. the winning team will also take home a replica of the icc cricket world cup trophy, that has been awarded since 1999. the decision was taken at the icc board meeting which was held in dubai on april 20, 2010.
us$250,000 – to each team exiting after the quarter-finals (4 teams)
us$500,000 – fourth placed team
us$500,000 – third placed team
us$1,500,000 – runner up
us$3,250,000 – winner


venues:
all the indian stadiums for the tournament had been finalised by mid-october 2009, and those of bangladesh and sri lanka in late october 2009. the icc announced all the venues in mumbai on 2 november 2009. two new stadiums were constructed in kandy and hambantota, sri lanka, for the event.


umpires:

the umpire selection panel selected 18 umpires excluding a reserve umpire, enamul haque (bangladesh) to officiate at the world cup: 5 from australia, 6 from asia, 3 from england, 2 from new zealand and 1 each from south africa and west indies.


squads:

each country chose a 30-member preliminary squad, which would then be reduced to 15. all the 14 teams announced their final squads before 19 january 2011.


matches:


=warm-up matches:

the following 14 warm-up matches were played before the world cup started. for statistical purposes, these matches are not considered to be one day internationals.


=group stage:


==group a:=

the top four teams from each group qualified for the quarter-finals (indicated in green).


==group b:=

the top four teams from each group qualified for the quarter finals (indicated in green).


=knockout stage:


==quarter-finals:=


==semi-finals:=


==final:=


statistics:


controversies:
bangladeshi fans threw rocks at the west indies team bus as it returned players to their hotel after their win over bangladesh in dhaka on 4 march. it was later claimed that the rock-throwers had confused the bus with the bangladesh team bus. the elite rapid action battalion of bangladesh arrested 38 people after the attack, and the west indies later received an apology.
the political party shiv sena threatened to disrupt the final in mumbai if the pakistani team qualified.
during the group stage match between india and england, ian bell was given not out for leg before wicket despite the ball hitting him in line with the wickets and being on a path to hit the stumps. india captain ms dhoni referred the decision to the tv umpire, who confirmed the original decision as the ball had struck bell at a point more than 2.5 m (8 ft 2 in) from the stumps, a point at which the reliability of the hawk-eye system diminishes below acceptable levels. dhoni later complained that the rule had deprived his side of what seemed like an obvious wicket. the rules were subsequently revised and the umpires were given new guidelines. the sri lankan captain, kumar sangakkara, later criticised the decision to alter the 2.5-metre rule while a tournament was in progress.
in the final between india and sri lanka, loud crowd noise prevented match referee jeff crowe from hearing sri lankan captain sangakkara's call as the coin was tossed by indian captain dhoni. the toss had to be redone – an extremely unusual event, especially at as prominent an event as the world cup final.


see also:


references and notes:the ranji trophy is a domestic first-class cricket championship played in india between teams representing regional and state cricket associations. the competition currently consists of 37 teams, with all 29 states in india and two of the seven union territories having at least one representation. the competition is named after first indian cricketer who played international cricket, ranjitsinhji, who was also known as 'ranji'.
the current ranji trophy championship is held by vidarbha, which won against saurashtra by 78 runs in the final match of the 2018–19 season held at vidarbha cricket association stadium, nagpur.


history:

the competition was launched in following a meeting in july 1934, with the first fixtures taking place in 1934–35. the trophy was donated by ranji . the first match of the competition was held on 4 november 1934 between madras and mysore at the chepauk ground in madras in the final. mumbai(bombay)  have won the tournament the most number of times with 41 wins including 15 back-to-back wins from 1958–59 to 1972–73.


participants:
state teams and cricket associations and clubs with first-class status are qualified to play in the ranji trophy. while most associations are regional, like the karnataka state cricket association and mumbai cricket association, two, railways and services, are pan-indian


current teams:
the following 37 teams currently participate in the ranji trophy:

† denotes newly added teams for the 2018–19 season


defunct teams:
the following teams have appeared in the ranji trophy, but no longer do so:

central provinces and berar (1934/35 – 1949/50)
northern india (1934/35 – 1946/47)
sind (1934/35 – 1947/48)
southern punjab (1934/35 – 1951/52, 1959/60 – 1967/68)
western india (1934/35 – 1945/46)north west frontier province (1937/38 – 1946/47)
holkar (1941/42 – 1954/55)
gwalior (1943/44)
kathiawar (1946/47 – 1949/50)
patiala/patiala and eastern punjab states union (1948/49, 1953/54 – 1958/59)
eastern punjab (1950/51 – 1959/60)
travancore-cochin (1951/52 – 1956/57)
madhya bharat (1955/56 – 1956/57)
northern punjab (1960/61 – 1967/68)


format:
from its inception until the 2001 season, the teams were grouped geographically into four or five zones – north, west, east, and south, with central added in 1952–53. initial matches were played within the zones on a knock-out basis until 1956–57, and thereafter on a league basis, to determine a winner; then, the five individual zone winners competed in a knock-out tournament, leading to a final which decided the winner of the ranji trophy. from the 1970–71 season, the knock-out stage was expanded to the top two teams from each zone, a total of ten qualifying teams. this was expanded again to the top three from each zone in 1992–93, a total of fifteen qualifying teams; between 1996–97 and 1999–2000, the fifteen qualifying teams competed in a secondary group stage, with three groups of five teams, and the top two from each group qualified for a six-team knock-out stage; in all other years until 2001–02, a full fifteen-team knock-out tournament was held.
the format was changed in the 2002–03 season with the zonal system abandoned and a two-division structure adopted – the elite group, containing fifteen teams, and the plate group, containing the rest. each group had two sub-groups which played a round-robin; the top two from each elite sub-group then contested a four-team knock-out tournament to determine the winner of the ranji trophy. the team which finished last in each elite sub-group was relegated, and both plate group finalists were promoted for the following season. for the 2006–07 season, the divisions were re-labelled the super league and plate league respectively.
in the 2008–09 season, this format was adjusted to give both super league and plate league teams an opportunity to contest the ranji trophy. the top two from each plate sub-group contested semi-finals; the winners of these two matches then joined the top three from each super league sub-group in an eight-team knock-out tournament. the winner of this knock-out tournament then won the ranji trophy. promotion and relegation between super league and plate league continued as before. in the 2010–11 season, rajasthan won the ranji trophy after beginning the season in the plate league.
from the 2012–13 season, this format was adjusted slightly. the super league and plate league names were abandoned, but the two-tier system remained. the top tier expanded from fifteen teams to eighteen teams, in two sub-groups of nine (known as group a and group b, and considered equal in status); and the second tier was reduced to nine teams in a single group (known as group c). the top three teams from groups a and b and the top two from group c contest the knockout phase. the lowest placed team in each of group a and group b is relegated to group c, and the top two from group c are promoted to the top tier.
for the 2017-18 season, the two-tier system was abandoned to have 4 groups of seven teams each and two quarter-finalists from each group.
from the 2018-19 season, the teams contested in three-tiers. five teams will qualify for the quarter-finals from the top tier (known as elite group a and group b). two teams will qualify from the second-tier (elite group c) and one team from the lower-tier (plate group) for the quarter-finals.
round-robin matches are four days in length; knockout matches are played for five days. throughout its history, if there is no outright result in a ranji trophy knock-out match, the team leading after the first innings is the winner.
prior to the 2016–17 season matches were played at the home ground of one of the two teams taking part. for the 2016–17 competition the bcci decided that all games would be staged at a neutral venue.


=points summary:
points in the league stages of both divisions are currently awarded as follows:


tournament records:

† some sources credit goel with 636 or 640 wickets instead – see rajinder goel article for details.


winners:
the following teams have won the tournament:


=finals appearances by team:
mumbai/bombay have played in 46 of the 83 finals till 2016–17 and have won total 41 ranji trophy championships, the most by any team.


see also:

cricket in india
history of cricket
list of ranji trophy records
list of hat-tricks in the ranji trophy


references and notes:


external links:
official website of the bcci
the ranji trophy – cricinfothe indian premier league (ipl) is a professional twenty20 cricket league in india contested during march or april and may of every year by eight teams representing eight different cities in india. the league was founded by the board of control for cricket in india (bcci) in 2008, and is regarded as the brainchild of lalit modi, the founder and former commissioner of the league. ipl has an exclusive window in icc future tours programme.the ipl is the most-attended cricket league in the world and in 2014 ranked sixth by average attendance among all sports leagues. in 2010, the ipl became the first sporting event in the world to be broadcast live on youtube. the brand value of ipl in 2018 was us$6.3 billion, according to duff & phelps. according to bcci, the 2015 ipl season contributed ₹12,543.5 billion to the gdp of the indian economy.there have been eleven seasons of the ipl tournament. the current ipl title holders are the chennai super kings, who won the 2018 season.


history:


=background:
the indian cricket league (icl) was founded in 2007, with funding provided by zee entertainment enterprises. the icl was not recognised by the board of control for cricket in india (bcci) or the international cricket council (icc) and the bcci were not pleased with its committee members joining the icl executive board. to prevent players from joining the icl, the bcci increased the prize money in their own domestic tournaments and also imposed lifetime bans on players joining the icl, which was considered a rebel league by the board.


=foundation:

on 13 september 2007, the bcci announced the launch of a franchise-based twenty20 cricket competition called indian premier league whose first season was slated to start in april 2008, in a "high-profile ceremony" in new delhi. bcci vice-president lalit modi, said to be the mastermind behind the idea of ipl, spelled out the details of the tournament including its format, the prize money, franchise revenue system and squad composition rules. it was also revealed that the ipl would be run by a seven-man governing council composed of former india players and bcci officials, and that the top two teams of the ipl would qualify for that year's champions league twenty20. modi also clarified that they had been working on the idea for two years and that ipl was not started as a "knee-jerk reaction" to the icl. the league's format was similar to that of the premier league of england and the nba in the united states.in order to decide the owners for the new league, an auction was held on 24 january 2008 with the total base prices of the franchises costing around $400 million. at the end of the auction, the winning bidders were announced, as well as the cities the teams would be based in: bangalore, chennai, delhi, hyderabad, jaipur, kolkata, mohali, and mumbai. in the end, the franchises were all sold for a total of $723.59 million. the indian cricket league soon folded in 2008.


=expansions and terminations:

on 21 march 2010, it was announced that two new franchises – pune warriors india and kochi tuskers kerala – would join the league before the fourth season in 2011. sahara adventure sports group bought the pune franchise for $370 million while rendezvous sports world bought the kochi franchise for $333.3 million. however, one year later, on 11 november 2011, it was announced that the kochi tuskers kerala side would be terminated following the side breaching the bcci's terms of conditions.then, on 14 september 2012, following the team not being able to find new owners, the bcci announced that the 2009 champions, the deccan chargers, would be terminated. the next month, on 25 october, an auction was held to see who would be the owner of the replacement franchise, with sun tv network winning the bid for the hyderabad franchise. the team would be named sunrisers hyderabad.pune warriors india withdrew from the ipl on 21 may 2013 over financial differences with the bcci. the franchise was officially terminated by the bcci, on 26 october 2013, on account of the franchise failing to provide the necessary bank guarantee.on 14 june 2015, it was announced that two-time champions, chennai super kings, and the inaugural season champions, rajasthan royals, would be suspended for two seasons following their role in a match-fixing and betting scandal. then, on 8 december 2015, following an auction, it was revealed that pune and rajkot would replace chennai and rajasthan for two seasons. the two teams were the rising pune supergiant and the gujarat lions.


organization:


=tournament format:
currently, with eight teams, each team plays each other twice in a home-and-away round-robin format in the league phase. at the conclusion of the league stage, the top four teams will qualify for the playoffs. the top two teams from the league phase will play against each other in the first qualifying match, with the winner going straight to the ipl final and the loser getting another chance to qualify for the ipl final by playing the second qualifying match. meanwhile, the third and fourth place teams from league phase play against each other in an eliminator match and the winner from that match will play the loser from the first qualifying match. the winner of the second qualifying match will move onto the final to play the winner of the first qualifying match in the ipl final match, where the winner will be crowned the indian premier league champions.


=player acquisition, squad composition and salaries:
a team can acquire players through any of the three ways: the annual player auction, trading players with other teams during the trading windows, and signing replacements for unavailable players. players sign up for the auction and also set their base price, and are bought by the franchise that bids the highest for them. unsold players at the auction are eligible to be signed up as replacement signings. in the trading windows, a player can only be traded with his consent, with the franchise paying the difference if any between the old and new contract. if the new contract is worth more than the older one, the difference is shared between the player and the franchise selling the player. there are generally three trading windows–two before the auction, and one after the auction but before the start of the tournament. players can not be traded outside the trading windows or during the tournament, whereas replacements can be signed before or during the tournament.
some of the team composition rules (as of 2018 season) are as follows:

the squad strength must be between 18 and 25 players, with a maximum of 8 overseas players.
salary cap of the entire squad must not exceed ₹80 crore.
under-19 players can not be picked unless they have previously played first-class or list a cricket.
a team can play a maximum of 4 overseas players in their playing eleven.the term of a player contract is one year, with the franchise having the option to extend the contract by one or two years. since the 2014 season, the player contracts are denominated in the indian rupee, before which the contracts were in u.s. dollars. overseas players can be remunerated in the currency of the player's choice at the exchange rate on either the contract due date or the actual date of payment. prior to the 2014 season, indian domestic players were not included in the player auction pool and could be signed up by the franchises at a discrete amount while a fixed sum of ₹10 to 30 lakh would get deducted per signing from the franchise's salary purse. this received significant opposition from franchise owners who complained that richer franchises were "luring players with under-the-table deals" following which the ipl decided to include domestic players in the player auction.according to a 2015 survey by sporting intelligence and espn the magazine, the average ipl salary when pro-rated is us$4.33 million per year, the second highest among all sport leagues in the world. since the players in ipl are only contracted for the duration of the tournament (less than two months), the weekly ipl salaries are extrapolated pro rata to obtain average annual salary, unlike other sport leagues in which players are contracted by a single team for the entire year.


=match rules:
ipl games utilise television timeouts and hence there is no time limit in which teams must complete their innings. however, a penalty may be imposed if the umpires find teams misusing this privilege. each team is given a two-and-a-half-minute "strategic timeout" during each innings; one must be taken by the bowling team between the ends of the 6th and 9th overs, and one by the batting team between the ends of the 13th and 16th overs.since the 2018 season, the umpire decision review system is being used in all ipl matches, allowing each team one chance to review an on-field umpire's decision per innings.


=prize money:
the 2015 season of the ipl offered a total prize money of ₹40 crore (us$5.6 million), with the winning team netting ₹15 crore (us$2.1 million). the first and second runners up received 10 and 7.5 crores, respectively, with the fourth placed team also winning 7.5 crores. the others teams are not awarded any prize money. the ipl rules mandate that half of the prize money must be distributed among the players.


teams:


=current teams:


=former teams:


tournament seasons and results:

out of the thirteen teams that have played in the indian premier league since its inception, two teams has won the competition three times, one team has won the competition twice each and three other teams have won it once. mumbai indians and chennai super kings are the most successful teams in league's history in terms of the number of titles won. the kolkata knight riders have won two titles, and the other three teams who have won the tournament are the deccan chargers, rajasthan royals and sunrisers hyderabad. 
the current champions are chennai super kings who beat sunrisers hyderabad in the final of the 2018 season to secure their third title and thus became the joint most successful team in ipl history ever with mumbai indians.


=teams' performances:
†no longer exists.


awards:


=orange cap:

the orange cap is awarded to the top run-scorer in the ipl during a season. it is an ongoing competition with the leader wearing the cap throughout the tournament until the final game, with the eventual winner keeping the cap for the season.


=purple cap:

the purple cap is awarded to the top wicket-taker in the ipl during a season. it is an ongoing competition with the leader wearing the cap throughout the tournament until the final game, with the eventual winner keeping the cap for the season.


financials:


=title sponsorship:
from 2008 to 2012, the title sponsor was dlf, india's largest real estate developer, who had secured the rights with a bid of ₹200 crore for five seasons. after the conclusion of the 2012 season, pepsico bought the title sponsorship rights for ₹396.8 crore for the subsequent five seasons. however, the company terminated the deal in october 2015 two years before the expiry of the contract, reportedly due to the two-season suspension of chennai and rajasthan franchises from the league. pepsico paid ₹238.08 crore for three years of sponsorship before terminating the contract. the bcci then transferred the title sponsorship rights for the remaining two seasons of the contract to chinese smartphone manufacturer vivo for ₹190 crore. in june 2017, vivo retained the rights for the next five seasons (2018–2022) with a winning bid of ₹2199 crore, in a deal more expensive than barclays' premier league title sponsorship contract between 2013 and 2016.


=brand value:
the tournament has grown rapidly in value over the years 2016-18, as seen in a series of jumps in value from one season to the next. the ipl as a whole was valued by financial experts at $4.16 billion us dollars in 2016, but that number grew to $5.3 billion in 2017, and $6.13 billion in 2018. a report from duff and phelps said that one of the contributing factors in the rapid growth of the value of the indian premier league was signing a new television deal with star india private limited, which engaged more viewers due to the fact that the ipl was transmitted to regional channels in 8 different languages, rather than the previous deal, which saw the transmissions limited to sports networks with english language commentary. , the report also stated that the game continued to recover from recent controversy, stating "this ipl season has grabbed the eyeballs for all the right reasons with a relatively controversy free tournament, coupled with some scintillating on-field performances which have brought the spotlight back on the game."according to another independent report conducted by brand finance, a london-based company, after the conclusion of the 2017 indian premier league, the ipl has seen its business value grow by 37% to an all-time high of us$5.3 billion — crossing the five billion mark for the first time in a season. according to the director of the company: “now in it’s 11th season, the indian premier league is here to stay. the league has delivered financially for the players, franchisees, sponsors and india as a whole, prompting a strong desire among a range of stakeholders to appropriately value it. to ensure continued development, management and team owners will have to explore innovative ways of engaging fans, clubs, and sponsors.the valuation of the individual franchises themselves vary, with the top valued teams being the mumbai indians ($113,000,000) and the kolkata knight riders ($104,000,000). other franchises mentioned in the report, varied in value from $43,000,000 (rajasthan royals) to the chennai super kings ($98,000,000). ,


broadcasting:
the ipl's broadcast rights were originally held by a partnership between sony pictures networks and world sport group, under a ten-year contract valued at us$1.026 billion. sony would be responsible for domestic television, while wsg would handle international distribution. the initial plan was for 20% of these proceeds to go to the ipl, 8% as prize money and 72% would be distributed to the franchisees from 2008 until 2012, after which the ipl would go public and list its shares. however, in march 2010, ipl decided not to go public and list its shares. as of the 2016 season, sony max, sony six, and sony espn served as the domestic broadcasters of the ipl; max and six aired broadcasts in hindi, while six also aired broadcasts in the bengali, tamil, and telugu languages. sony espn broadcast english-language feeds.the ipl became a major television property within india; sony max typically became the most-watched television channel in the country during the tournament, and by 2016, annual advertising revenue surpassed ₹1,200 crore. viewership numbers were expected to increase further during the 2016 season due to the industry adoption of the new barc ratings system, which also calculates rural viewership rather than only urban markets. in the 2016 season, sony's broadcasts achieved just over 1 billion impressions (television viewership in thousands), jumping to 1.25 billion the following year. sony also broadcast a companion talk show, extraaa innings t20.on 4 september 2017, it was announced that the then-current digital rightsholder, star india, had acquired the global media rights to the ipl under a five-year contract beginning in 2018. valued at ₹163.475 billion (us$2.55 billion, £1.97 billion), it is a 158% increase over the previous deal, and the most expensive broadcast rights deal in the history of cricket. the ipl sold the rights in packages for domestic television, domestic digital, and international rights; although sony held the highest bid for domestic television, and facebook had made a us$600 million bid for domestic digital rights (which u.s. media interpreted as a sign that the social network was interested in pursuing professional sports rights), star was the only bidder out of the shortlist of 14 to make bids in all three categories.star ceo uday shankar stated that the ipl was a "very powerful property", and that star would "remain very committed to make sure that the growth of sports in this country continues to be driven by the power of cricket". he went on to say that "whoever puts in that money, they put in that money because they believe in the fans of the sport. the universe of cricket fans, it tells you, continues to very healthy, continues to grow. what was paid in 2008, that was 2008. india and cricket and ipl—all three have changed dramatically in the last 10 years. it is a reflection of that." the deal led to concerns that star india now held a monopoly on major cricket rights in the country, as it is also the rightsholder of icc competitions and the indian national team.for its inaugural season, star aimed to put a larger focus on widening the ipl's appeal with a "core" cricket audience. the network aimed to broadcast at least two hours of ipl-related programming daily from january until the start of the season, having organized televised announcements of player retention selections and new team captains. viewership of the player auction, which featured pre- and post-auction reactions and analysis, increased six-fold to 46.5 million. in march, star sports broadcast game plan: in your city specials from the home city of each of the ipl's franchises. star sports stated that its in-season coverage and studio programming would focus more on the game itself and behind-the-scenes coverage of the ipl's teams, rather than trying to incorporate irrelevant entertainment elements. the network introduced a new studio program known as the dugout, which broadcasts coverage of matches with analysis from a panel of experts.star broadcasts ipl matches live online in india via its over-the-top video streaming platform hotstar to subscribers of hotstar vip or hotstar premium matches are also available on jio tv & airtel tv apps on smartphones.


=international broadcasters:


ipl governing council:
the ipl governing council is responsible for all the functions of the tournament. the members are rajeev shukla, ajay shirke, sourav ganguly, anurag thakur and anirudh chaudhary. in january 2016, the supreme court appointed lodha committee to recommend separate governing bodies for the board of control for cricket in india (bcci) and the indian premier league (ipl), where justice rm lodha suggested a one state-one member pattern for the board.


see also:

list of indian premier league players
list of current indian premier league team rosters
controversies involving the indian premier league

PREAMBLE
THE SPIRIT OF CRICKET
Cricket owes much of its appeal and enjoyment to the fact that it should be played not only according to the Laws (which are incorporated within these Playing Conditions), but also within the Spirit of Cricket.
The major responsibility for ensuring fair play rests with the captains, but extends to all players, umpires and, especially in junior cricket, teachers, coaches and parents.
Respect is central to the Spirit of Cricket.
Respect your captain, team-mates, opponents and the authority of the umpires. Play hard and play fair.
Accept the umpire’s decision.
Create a positive atmosphere by your own conduct, and encourage others to do likewise. Show self-discipline, even when things go against you.
Congratulate the opposition on their successes, and enjoy those of your own team.
Thank the officials and your opposition at the end of the match, whatever the result.
Cricket is an exciting game that encourages leadership, friendship and teamwork, which brings together people from different nationalities, cultures and religions, especially when played within the Spirit of Cricket.
THE PLAYERS
Number of players
A match is played between two sides, each of eleven players, one of whom shall be captain.
Nomination and replacement of players
Each captain shall nominate 11 players plus a maximum of 4 substitute fielders in writing to the ICC Match Referee before the toss. No player (member of the playing eleven) may be changed after the nomination without the consent of the opposing captain.
Only those nominated as substitute fielders shall be entitled to act as substitute fielders during the match, unless the ICC Match
Referee, in exceptional circumstances, allows subsequent additions.
All those nominated including those nominated as substitute fielders, must be eligible to play for that particular team and by such nomination the nominees shall warrant that they are so eligible.
In addition, by their nomination, the nominees shall be deemed to have agreed to abide by all the applicable ICC Regulations pertaining to international cricket and in particular, the Clothing and Equipment Regulations, the Code of Conduct for Players and Player Support Personnel (hereafter referred to as the ICC Code of Conduct), the Anti-Racism Code for Players and Player Support Personnel, the Anti-Doping Code and the Anti-Corruption Code.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
A player or player support personnel who has been suspended from participating in a match shall not, from the toss of the coin and for the remainder of the match thereafter:
Be nominated as, or carry out any of the duties or responsibilities of a substitute fielder, or
Enter any part of the playing area (which shall include the field of play and the area between the boundary and the perimeter boards) at any time, including any scheduled or unscheduled breaks in play.
A player who has been suspended from participating in a match shall be permitted from the toss of the coin and for the remainder of the match thereafter be permitted to enter the players’ dressing room provided that the players’ dressing room (or any part thereof) for the match is not within the playing area described in clause
1.2.5.2 above (for example, the player is not permitted to enter the on-field ‘dug-out’).
Captain
If at any time the captain is not available, a deputy shall act for him.
If a captain is not available to nominate the players, then any person associated with that team may act as his deputy to do so. See clause1.2.
At any time after the nomination of the players, only a nominated player can act as deputy in discharging the duties and responsibilities of the captain as stated in these Playing Conditions, including at the toss. See clause 13.4 (The toss).
Each Member Board must nominate its ‘ODI Team Captain’ to the ICC when appointed.
If the ‘ODI Team Captain’ is not participating in a series, the relevant Home Board must nominate a replacement ‘ODI Team Captain’ for the series. The Home Board shall advise the series Match Referee.
If the ‘ODI Team Captain’ plays in a match without being the nominated captain for that match, he will be deemed to be the captain should any penalties be applied for over rate breaches under the ICC Code of Conduct.
Responsibility of captains
The captains are responsible at all times for ensuring that play is conducted within The Spirit of Cricket as well as within these Playing Conditions.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
THE UMPIRES
Appointment and attendance
The following rules for the selection and appointment of ODI umpires shall be followed as far as it is practicable to do so:
The umpires shall control the game as required by these Playing Conditions, with absolute impartiality and shall be present at the ground at least two hours before the scheduled start of the first day’s play, and at least 1.5 hours before the scheduled start of play.
The ICC shall establish an ‘Elite Panel’ of umpires who shall be contracted to the ICC.
Each Full Member shall nominate from its panel of first class umpires up to four umpires to an ‘International Panel’.
The ICC shall appoint one umpire to stand in each ODI match. Such umpire shall not be from the same country as the participating teams and shall be selected from the ‘Elite Panel’ or the ‘International Panel’.
The Home Board shall appoint one umpire to stand in each ODI. Such umpire shall be selected from its umpires on the Elite or International Panel.
As early as possible before each ODI Match, the ICC will advise the Home Board of the names of its appointees and the Home Board will advise the Manager of the visiting team of all umpires’ names.
In ODI matches where the DRS is used, the ICC will appoint a third umpire who shall act as the emergency on-field umpire and officiate in regard to the DRS. Such third umpire shall not be from the same country as the participating teams and shall be appointed from the ‘Elite Panel’ or the ‘International Panel’.
In all other ODI matches, the third umpire will be appointed by the Home Board and shall act as the emergency on-field umpire and officiate in regard to TV replays. Such appointment shall be made from the ‘Elite Panel’ or the ‘International Panel’.
The playing conditions governing the use of the DRS and the third umpire are included in Appendix D.
The Home Board shall also appoint a fourth umpire for each ODI match from its panel of first class umpires. The fourth umpire shall act as the emergency third umpire. In ‘DRS’ ODI matches the fourth umpire shall be appointed from the “International Panel”.
The ICC shall appoint the match referee for all matches (ICC Match Referee).
The ICC Match Referee shall not be from the same country as the participating teams.
Neither team will have a right of objection to the appointment of any umpire or match referee.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Change of umpire
An umpire shall not be changed during the match, other than in exceptional circumstances, unless he/she is injured or ill.
Consultation with Home Board
Before the match the umpires shall consult with the Home Board to determine;
the balls to be used during the match. See clause 4 (The ball).
the hours of play and the times and durations of any agreed intervals.
which clock or watch and back-up time piece is to be used during the match.
the boundary of the field of play. See clause 19 (Boundaries).
the use of covers. See clause 10 (Covering the pitch).
any special conditions of play affecting the conduct of the match. inform the scorers of agreements in 2.3.2, 2.3.3, 2.3.4 and 2.3.6.
The wickets, creases and boundaries
Before the toss and during the match, the umpires shall satisfy themselves that:
the wickets are properly pitched. See clause 8 (The wickets)
the creases are correctly marked. See clause 7 (The creases).
the boundary of the field of play complies with the requirements of clauses 19.1 (Determining the boundary of the field of play),
19.2 (Identifying and marking the boundary) and 19.3 (Restoring the boundary).
Conduct of the match, implements and equipment
Before the toss and during the match, the umpires shall satisfy themselves that
the conduct of the match is strictly in accordance with these Playing Conditions.
the implements used in the match conform to the following
clause 4 (The ball).
externally visible requirements of clause 5 (The bat) and paragraph 1 of Appendix B
either clauses 8.2 (Size of stumps) and 8.3 (The bails).
no player uses equipment other than that permitted. See paragraph 2 of Appendix A. Note particularly therein the interpretation of ‘protective helmet’.
the wicket-keeper’s gloves comply with the requirements of clause 27.2 (Gloves).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Fair and unfair play
The umpires shall be the sole judges of fair and unfair play.
Fitness for play
It is solely for the umpires together to decide whether either conditions of ground, weather or light or exceptional
circumstances mean that it would be dangerous or unreasonable for play to take place.
Conditions shall not be regarded as either dangerous or unreasonable merely because they are not ideal.
The fact that the grass and the ball are wet does not warrant the ground conditions being regarded as unreasonable or dangerous.
Conditions shall be regarded as dangerous if there is actual and foreseeable risk to the safety of any player or umpire.
Conditions shall be regarded as unreasonable if, although posing no risk to safety, it would not be sensible for play to proceed.
If the umpires consider the ground is so wet or slippery as to deprive the bowler of a reasonable foothold, the fielders of the power of free movement, or the batsmen of the ability to play their strokes or to run between the wickets, then these conditions shall be regarded as so bad that it would be dangerous and unreasonable for play to take place.
Suspension of play in dangerous or unreasonable circumstances
All references to ground include the pitch. See clause 6.1 (Area of pitch).
If at any time the umpires together agree that the conditions of ground, weather or light, or any other circumstances are
dangerous or unreasonable, they shall immediately suspend play, or not allow play to start or to recommence. The decision as to whether conditions are so bad as to warrant such action is one for the umpires alone to make, following consultation with the ICC Match Referee.
If circumstances are warranted, the umpires shall stop play and instruct the Ground Authority to take whatever action they can and use whatever equipment is necessary to remove as much dew as possible from the outfield when conditions become unreasonable or dangerous. The umpires may also instruct
the ground staff to take such action during scheduled and unscheduled breaks in play.
The umpires shall disregard any shadow on the pitch from the stadium or from any permanent object on the ground.
Light Meters
It is the responsibility of the ICC to supply light meters to the match officials to be used in accordance with these playing conditions.
All light meters shall be uniformly calibrated.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The umpires shall be entitled to use light meter readings as a guideline for determining whether the light is fit for play in accordance with the criteria set out in clause 2.8.2 above.
Light meter readings may accordingly be used by the umpires:
To determine whether there has been at any stage a deterioration or improvement in the light.
As benchmarks for the remainder of a match.
Use of artificial lights
If in the opinion of the umpires, natural light is deteriorating to an unfit level, they shall authorize the Ground Authority to use the available artificial lighting so that the match can commence or continue in acceptable conditions.
In the event of power failure or lights malfunction, the provisions relating to the delay or interruption of play due to bad weather or light shall apply.
When there is a suspension of play it is the responsibility of the umpires to monitor conditions. They shall make inspections as often as appropriate, unaccompanied by any players or officials. Immediately the umpires together agree that the conditions are no longer dangerous or unreasonable they shall call upon the players to resume play.
The safety of all persons within the ground is of paramount importance to the ICC. In the event that of any threatening circumstance, whether actual or perceived (including for example weather, pitch invasions, act of God, etc.), then the umpires, on the advice of the ICC Match Referee, should suspend play and all players and officials should immediately be asked to leave the field of play in a safe and orderly manner and to relocate to a secure and safe area (depending on each particular threat) pending the satisfactory passing or resolution of such threat or risk to the reasonable satisfaction of the umpires, the ICC Match Referee, the
head of the relevant Ground Authority, the head of ground security and/or the police as the circumstances may require.
Where play is suspended under clause 2.8.8 above the decision to abandon or resume play shall be the responsibility of the ICC Match Referee who shall act only after consultation with the head of ground security and the police.
Position of umpires
The umpires shall stand where they can best see any act upon which their decision may be required.
Subject to this over-riding consideration, the bowler’s end umpire shall stand in a position so as not to interfere with either the bowler’s run-up or the striker’s view.
The striker’s end umpire may elect to stand on the off side instead of the on side of the pitch, provided he/she informs the captain of the fielding side, the striker and the other umpire.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Umpires changing ends
Shall not apply.
Disagreement and dispute
Where there is disagreement or dispute about any matter, the umpires together shall make the final decision. See also clause 31.6 (Consultation by umpires).
Umpire’s decision
An umpire may alter any decision provided that such alteration is made promptly. This apart, an umpire’s decision, once made, is final.
Signals
The following code of signals shall be used by umpires.
Signals made while the ball is in play
No ball – by extending one arm horizontally.
Out – by raising an index finger above the head. (If not out, the umpire shall call Not out.)
Wide – by extending both arms horizontally.
Dead ball – by crossing and re-crossing the wrists below the waist.
When the ball is dead, the bowler’s end umpire shall repeat the signals in clause 2.13.1.1, with the exception of the signal for Out, to the scorers.
The signals listed below shall be made to the scorers only when the ball is dead.
Boundary 4 – by waving an arm from side to side finishing with the arm across the chest.
Boundary 6 – by raising both arms above the head. Bye – by raising an open hand above the head.
Five Penalty runs awarded to the batting side – by repeated tapping of one shoulder with the opposite hand.
Five Penalty runs awarded to the fielding side – by placing one hand on the opposite shoulder.
Leg bye – by touching a raised knee with the hand.
Revoke last signal – by touching both shoulders, each with the opposite hand.
Short run – by bending one arm upwards and touching the nearer shoulder with the tips of the fingers.
Free Hit – after signaling the No ball, the bowler’s end umpire extends one arm straight upwards and moves it in a circular motion.
Powerplay Over – by rotating his arm in a large circle.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The following signal is for Level 4 player conduct offences. The signal has two parts, both of which should be acknowledged separately by the scorers.
Level 4 conduct
Part 1 – by putting one arm out to the side of the body and repeatedly raising it and lowering it.
Part 2 – by raising an index finger, held at shoulder height, to the side of the body.
2.13.1.4 All the signals in clause 2.13.1.3 are to be made by the bowler’s end umpire except that for Short run, which is to be signalled by the umpire at the end where short
running occurs. However, the bowler’s end umpire shall be responsible both for the final signal of Short run to the scorers and, if more than one run is short, for informing them as to the number of runs to be recorded.
The umpire shall wait until each signal to the scorers has been separately acknowledged by a scorer before allowing play to proceed.
If several signals are to be used, they should be given in the order that the events occurred.
Informing the umpires
Wherever the umpires are to receive information from captains or other players under these Playing Conditions, it will be sufficient for one umpire to be so informed and for him/her to inform the other umpire.
Correctness of scores
Consultation between umpires and scorers on doubtful points is essential. The umpires shall, throughout the match, satisfy themselves as to the correctness of the number of runs scored, the wickets that have fallen and, where appropriate, the number of overs bowled.
The umpires shall ensure that they are able to contact the scorers at any time during the match and at its conclusion to address any issues relating to the correctness of scores.
THE SCORERS
Appointment of scorers
Two scorers shall be appointed to record all runs scored, all wickets taken and, where appropriate, number of overs bowled.
Correctness of scores
The scorers shall frequently check to ensure that their records agree and consult with the umpires if necessary. See clause 2.15 (Correctness of scores).
Acknowledging signals
The scorers shall accept all instructions and signals given to them by the umpires and shall immediately acknowledge each separate signal.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
THE BALL
Weight and size
The ball, when new, shall weigh not less than 5.5 ounces/155.9 g, nor more than 5.75 ounces/163 g, and shall measure not less than 8.81 in/22.4 cm, nor more than 9 in/22.9 cm in circumference.
Approval and control of balls
The Home Board shall provide white cricket balls of an approved standard for ODI cricket and spare used balls for changing during a match, which shall also be of the same brand. Note: The Home Board shall be required to advise the Visiting Board of the brand of ball to be used in the match(es) at least 30 days prior to the start of the match(es).
The fielding captain or his nominee may select the ball with which he wishes to bowl from the supply provided by the Home Board. The fourth umpire shall take a box containing at least 6 new balls to the dressing room and supervise the selection of the ball.
The umpires shall retain possession of the match ball(s) throughout the duration of the match when play is not actually taking place.
During play umpires shall periodically and irregularly inspect the condition of the ball and shall retain possession of it at the fall of a wicket, a drinks interval, or any other disruption in play.
New ball
Each fielding team shall have two new balls for its innings, to be used in alternate overs i.e. one from each end.
In a match reduced to 25 overs or less per side before the first innings commences, each team shall have only one new ball for its Innings.
Ball lost or becoming unfit for play
If, during play, the ball cannot be found or recovered or the umpires agree that it has become unfit for play through normal use, the umpires shall replace it with a ball which has had wear comparable with that which the previous ball had received before the need for its replacement. When the ball is replaced, the umpire shall inform the batsmen and the fielding captain.
THE BAT
The bat
The bat consists of two parts, a handle and a blade.
The basic requirements and measurements of the bat are set out in this clause with detailed specifications in paragraph 1 of Appendix B.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The handle
The handle is to be made principally of cane and/or wood.
The part of the handle that is wholly outside the blade is defined to be the upper portion of the handle. It is a straight shaft for holding the bat.
The upper portion of the handle may be covered with a grip as defined in paragraph 1.2.2 of Appendix B.
The blade
The blade comprises the whole of the bat apart from the handle as defined in clause 5.2 and in paragraph 1.3 of Appendix B.
The blade shall consist solely of wood.
Protection and repair
Subject to the specifications in paragraph 1.4 of Appendix B. and providing clause 5.5 is not contravened,
solely for the purposes of either
protection from surface damage to the face, sides and shoulders of the blade
or
repair to the blade after surface damage,
material that is not rigid, either at the time of its application to the blade or subsequently, may be placed on these surfaces.
for repair of the blade after damage other than surface damage
solid material may be inserted into the blade.
The only material permitted for any insertion is wood with minimal essential adhesives.
to prevent damage to the toe, material may be placed on that part of the blade but shall not extend over any part of the face, back or sides of the blade.
Damage to the ball
For any part of the bat, covered or uncovered, the hardness of the constituent materials and the surface texture thereof
shall not be such that either or both could cause unacceptable damage to the ball.
Any material placed on any part of the bat, for whatever purpose, shall similarly not be such that it could cause unacceptable damage to the ball.
For the purpose of this clause, unacceptable damage is any change that is greater than normal wear and tear caused by the ball striking the uncovered wooden surface of the blade.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Contact with the ball
In these clauses,
reference to the bat shall imply that the bat is held in the batsman’s hand or a glove worn on his hand, unless stated otherwise.
contact between the ball and any of 5.6.2.1 to 5.6.2.4
the bat itself
the batsman’s hand holding the bat
any part of a glove worn on the batsman’s hand holding the bat
any additional materials permitted under 5.4
shall be regarded as the ball striking or touching the bat or being struck by the bat.
Bat size limits
The overall length of the bat, when the lower portion of the handle is inserted, shall not be more than 38 in/96.52 cm.
The blade of the bat shall not exceed the following dimensions: Width: 4.25in / 10.8 cm
Depth: 2.64in / 6.7 cm Edges: 1.56in / 4.0cm
Furthermore, it should also be able to pass through a bat gauge as described in paragraph 1.6 of Appendix B.
The handle shall not exceed 52% of the overall length of the bat.
The material permitted for covering the blade in clause 5.4.1 shall not exceed 0.04 in/0.1 cm in thickness.
The maximum permitted thickness of protective material placed on the toe of the blade is 0.12 in/0.3 cm.
Categories of bat
Type A bats conform to clauses 5.1 to 5.7 inclusive.
Only Type A bats may be used in ODI matches.
THE PITCH
Area of pitch
The pitch is a rectangular area of the ground 22 yards/20.12 m in length and 10 ft/3.05 m in width. It is bounded at either end by the bowling creases and on either side by imaginary lines, one each side of the imaginary line joining the centres of the two middle stumps, each parallel to it and 5 ft/1.52 m from it. If the pitch is next to an artificial pitch which is closer than 5 ft/1.52 m from the middle stumps, the pitch on that side will extend only to the junction of the two surfaces. See clauses 8.1 (Description, width and pitching) and 7.2 (The bowling crease).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Fitness of pitch for play
The umpires shall be the sole judges of the fitness of the pitch for play. See clauses 2.7 (Fitness for play) and 2.8 (Suspension of play in dangerous or unreasonable conditions).
Selection and preparation
Before the match, the Ground Authority shall be responsible for the selection and preparation of the pitch. During the match, the umpires shall control its use and maintenance.
The Ground Authority shall ensure that during the period prior to the start of play and during intervals, the pitch area shall be roped off so as to prevent unauthorised access. (The pitch area
shall include an area at least 2 metres beyond the rectangle made by the crease markings at both ends of the pitch).
The fourth umpire shall ensure that, prior to the start of play and during any intervals, only authorised staff, the ICC match officials, players, team coaches and authorised television personnel shall be allowed access to the pitch area. Such access shall be subject to the following limitations:
Only captains and team coaches may walk on the actual playing surface of the pitch area (outside of the crease markings).
Access to the pitch area by television personnel shall be restricted to one camera crew (including one or two television commentators) of the official licensed television broadcaster(s) (but not news crews).
No spiked footwear shall be permitted.
No one shall be permitted to bounce a ball on the pitch, strike it with a bat or cause damage to the pitch in any other way.
Access shall not interfere with pitch preparation.
In the event of any dispute, the ICC Match Referee will rule and his ruling will be final.
Changing the pitch
If the on-field umpires decide that it is dangerous or unreasonable for play to continue on the match pitch, they shall stop play and immediately advise the ICC Match Referee.
The on-field umpires and the ICC Match Referee shall then consult with both captains.
If the captains agree to continue, play shall resume.
If the decision is not to resume play, the on-field umpires together with the ICC Match Referee shall consider whether the existing pitch can be repaired and the match resumed from the point it was stopped. In considering whether to authorise such repairs, the ICC Match Referee must consider whether this would place either side at an unfair advantage, given the play that had already taken place on the dangerous pitch.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
If the decision is that the existing pitch cannot be repaired, then the match is to be abandoned with the following consequences:
In the event of the required number of overs to constitute a match having been completed at the time the match is abandoned, the result shall be determined according to the provisions of clause 16.4.2.
In the event of the required number of overs to constitute a match not having been completed, the match will be abandoned as a no result.
If the abandonment occurs on the day of the match, the ICC Match Referee shall consult with the Home Board with the objective of finding a way for a new match (including a new nomination of teams and toss) to commence on the same date and venue. Such a match may be played either on the repaired pitch or on another pitch, subject to the ICC Match Referee and the relevant Ground Authority both being satisfied that the new pitch will be of the required ODI standard. The playing time lost between the scheduled start time of the original match and
the actual start time of the new match will be covered by the provisions of clause 12.
If it is not possible to start a new match on the scheduled day of the match, the relevant officials from the participating Boards shall agree on whether the match can be replayed within the existing tour schedule.
Throughout the above decision making processes, the ICC Match Referee shall keep informed both captains and the head of the Ground Authority. The head of the Ground Authority shall ensure that suitable and prompt public announcements are made.
Non-turf pitches
All ODI matches shall be played on natural turf pitches. The use of PVA and other adhesives in the preparation of pitches is not permitted.
THE CREASES
The creases
The positions of a bowling crease, a popping crease and two return creases shall be marked by white lines, as set out in clauses 7.2, 7.3 and 7.4, at each end of the pitch. See paragraph 1 of Appendix C.
The bowling crease
The bowling crease, which is the back edge of the crease marking, is the line that marks the end of the pitch, as in clause 6.1 (Area of pitch). It shall be 8 ft 8 in/2.64 m in length.
The popping crease
The popping crease, which is the back edge of the crease marking, shall be in front of and parallel to the bowling crease and shall be 4 ft/1.22 m from it. The popping crease shall be marked to a minimum of 15 yards/13.71 m on either side of the imaginary line joining the centres of the two middle stumps and shall be considered to be unlimited in length.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The return creases
The return creases, which are the inside edges of the crease markings, shall be at right angles to the popping crease at a distance of 4 ft 4 in/1.32 m either side of the imaginary line joining the centres of the two middle stumps. Each return crease shall be marked from the popping crease to a minimum of 8 ft/2.44 m behind it and shall be considered to be unlimited in length.
Additional Crease Markings
As a guideline to the umpires for the calling of Wides on the offside, the crease markings detailed in paragraph 1 of Appendix C shall be marked in white at each end of the pitch.
THE WICKETS
Description, width and pitching
Two sets of wickets shall be pitched opposite and parallel to each other in the centres of the bowling creases. Each set shall be 9 in/22.86 cm wide and shall consist of three wooden stumps with two wooden bails on top. See paragraph 2 of Appendix B.
Size of stumps
The tops of the stumps shall be 28 in/71.12 cm above the playing surface and shall be dome shaped except for the bail grooves. The portion of
a stump above the playing surface shall be cylindrical apart from the domed top, with circular section of diameter not less than 1.38 in/3.50 cm nor more than 1.5 in/3.81 cm. See paragraph 2 of Appendix B.
For televised matches the Home Board may provide a slightly larger cylindrical stump to accommodate the stump camera. When the larger stump is used, all three stumps must be exactly the same size.
The bails
The bails, when in position on top of the stumps,
shall not project more than 0.5 in/1.27 cm above them.
shall fit between the stumps without forcing them out of the vertical.
Each bail shall conform to the following specifications. See paragraph 2 of Appendix B.
Overall length 4.31 in/10.95 cm Length of barrel 2.13 in/5.40 cm Longer spigot 1.38 in/3.50 cm Shorter spigot 0.81 in/2.06 cm.
The two spigots and the barrel shall have the same centre line.
Devices aimed at protecting player safety by limiting the distance that a bail can travel off the stumps will be allowed, subject to the approval of the Home Board and the ICC.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Dispensing with bails
The umpires may agree to dispense with the use of bails, if necessary. If they so agree then no bails shall be used at either end. The use of bails shall be resumed as soon as conditions permit. See clause 29.4 (Dispensing with bails).
LED Wickets
The use of approved LED Wickets is permitted. Refer also to paragraphs
3.8.1.6 and 4.2 of Appendix D.
PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE OF THE PLAYING AREA
Rolling
The pitch shall not be rolled during the match except as permitted in clauses 9.1.1 and 9.1.2.
Frequency and duration of rolling
During the match the pitch may be rolled at the request of the captain of the side batting second, for a period of not more than 7 minutes, before the start of the second innings.
Rolling after a delayed start
In addition to the rolling permitted above, if, after the toss and before the first innings of the match, the start is delayed, the captain of the batting side may request that the pitch be rolled for not more than 7 minutes. However, if the umpires together agree that the delay has had no significant effect on the state of the pitch, they shall refuse such request for rolling of the pitch.
Choice of rollers
If there is more than one roller available the captain of the batting side shall choose which one is to be used.
The following shall apply in addition to clause 9.1:
Prior to the scheduled time for the toss, the artificial drying of the pitch and outfield shall be at the discretion of the Ground Authority. Thereafter and throughout the match the drying of the outfield may be undertaken at any time by the Ground Authority, but the drying of the affected area of the pitch shall be carried out only on the instructions and under the supervision of the umpires. The umpires shall be empowered to have the pitch dried without reference to the captains at any time they are of the opinion that it is unfit for play.
The umpires may instruct the Ground Authority to use any available equipment, including any roller for the purpose of drying the pitch and making it fit for play.
An absorbent roller may be used to remove water from the covers including the cover on the match pitch.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Clearing debris from the pitch
The pitch shall be cleared of any debris
between innings. This shall precede rolling if any is to take place.
at all intervals for meals.
The clearance of debris in clause 9.2.1 shall be done by sweeping, except where the umpires consider that this may be detrimental to the surface of the pitch. In this case the debris must be cleared from that area by hand, without sweeping.
In addition to 9.2.1, debris may be cleared from the pitch by hand, without sweeping, before mowing and whenever either umpire considers it necessary.
Mowing
Responsibility for mowing
All mowings which are carried out before the match shall be the sole responsibility of the Ground Authority.
Watering the pitch
The pitch shall not be watered during the match.
Re-marking creases
Creases shall be re-marked whenever either umpire considers it necessary.
Maintenance of footholes
The umpires shall ensure that the holes made by the bowlers and batsmen are cleaned out and dried whenever necessary to facilitate play.
The umpires shall allow, if necessary, the returfing of footholes made by the bowlers in their delivery strides, or the use of quick-setting fillings for the same purpose.
In addition, the umpires shall see that wherever possible and whenever it is considered necessary, action is taken during all intervals in play to do whatever is practicable to improve the bowler’s footholes.
Securing of footholds and maintenance of pitch
During play, umpires shall allow the players to secure their footholds by the use of sawdust provided that no damage to the pitch is caused and that clause 41 (Unfair play) is not contravened.
Protection and preparation of adjacent pitches during matches
The protection (by way of an appropriate cover) and preparation of pitches which are adjacent to the match pitch will be permitted during the match subject to the following:
Such measures will only be possible if requested by the Ground Authority and approved by the umpires before the start of the match.
Approval should only be granted where such measures are unavoidable and will not compromise the safety of the players or their ability to execute their actions with complete freedom.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
The preparation work shall be carried out under the supervision of the fourth umpire.
The consent of the captains is not required but the umpires shall advise both captains and the ICC Match Referee before the start of the match on what has been agreed.
COVERING THE PITCH
Before the match
The use of covers before the match is the responsibility of the Ground Authority and may include full covering if required.
The pitch shall be entirely protected against rain up to the commencement of play.
However, the Ground Authority shall grant suitable facility to the captains to inspect the pitch before the nomination of their players and to the umpires to discharge their duties as laid down in clauses 2 (The umpires), 6 (The pitch), 7 (The creases), 8 (The wickets), and 9 (Preparation and maintenance of the playing area).
During the match
The pitch shall be entirely protected against rain up to the commencement of play, and for the duration of the period of the match.
The covers must totally protect the pitch and also the pitch surroundings, to a minimum of 5 metres either side of the pitch, and any worn or soft areas in the outfield.
The bowlers’ run-ups shall be covered during inclement weather, in order to keep them dry, to a distance of at least 10 x 10 metres.
Removal of covers
All covers (including “hessian” or “scrim” covers used to protect the pitch against the sun) shall be removed not later than 2 ½ hours before the scheduled start of play provided it is not raining at the time, but the pitch will be covered again if rain falls prior to the commencement of play.
INTERVALS
An interval
The following shall be classed as intervals.
Intervals between innings.
Intervals for meals.
Intervals for drinks.
Any other agreed interval.
Only these intervals shall be considered as scheduled breaks for the purposes of clause 24.2.6.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Duration of interval
There shall be a 45 minute interval between innings, taken from the call of Time before the interval until the call of Play on resumption after the interval.
Allowance for interval between innings
Law 11.3 of the Laws of Cricket shall not apply.
Changing agreed times of intervals
If the innings of the team batting first is completed prior to the scheduled time for the interval, the interval shall take place immediately and the innings of the team batting second will commence correspondingly earlier providing that this does not lead to an interval occurring more than 30 minutes prior to the scheduled interval.
If the innings of the team batting first is completed more than 30 minutes prior to the scheduled interval a 10 minute break will
occur and the team batting second will commence its innings and the interval will occur as scheduled.
Where the innings of the side batting first is delayed or interrupted, the length of the interval will be reduced as follows:
If up to 15 minutes of actual playing time is lost (total playing time lost less any extra time provided), then the interval will be reduced by the amount of actual playing time lost.
If more than 15 minutes of actual playing time is lost (total playing time lost less any extra time provided), then the interval will be reduced to 30 minutes (subject to (iii) below).
Note: The prescribed interval timings above may be reduced further by the ICC Match Referee taking into account the intention of not having a prolonged interval after a lengthy interruption close to the conclusion
of the innings of the team batting first. However, the minimum interval shall not be less than ten minutes.
If at the time of the scheduled interval, the team batting second has lost nine wickets or requires no more than 25 runs to win, play shall continue until a result has been achieved, unless the players otherwise have cause to leave the field of play.
Note: In addition to clauses 11.4.3.1, 11.4.3.2 and 11.4.3.3 above, the length of the Interval may be reduced by the ICC Match Referee should exceptional circumstances arise.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Intervals for drinks
Two drinks breaks per session shall be permitted, each 1 hour 10 minutes apart. Under conditions of extreme heat the umpires may permit extra intervals for drinks.
An individual player may be given a drink either on the boundary edge or at the fall of a wicket, on the field, provided that no playing time is wasted. No other drinks shall be taken onto the field without the permission of the umpires. Any player taking drinks onto the field shall be dressed in proper cricket attire (subject to the wearing of bibs – refer to the note in clause 24.1.4).
Scorers to be informed
The umpires shall ensure that the scorers are informed of all agreements about hours of play and intervals and of any changes made thereto as permitted under this clause.
START OF PLAY; CESSATION OF PLAY
Call of Play
The bowler’s end umpire shall call Play before the first ball of the match and on the resumption of play after any interval or interruption.
Call of Time
The bowler’s end umpire shall call Time, when the ball is dead, at the end of any session of play or as required by these Playing Conditions. See also clause 20.3 (Call of Over or Time).
Removal of bails
After the call of Time, the bails shall be removed from both wickets.
Starting a new over
Another over shall always be started at any time during the match, unless an interval is to be taken in the circumstances set out in clause 12.5.2, if the umpire, walking at normal pace, has arrived at the position behind the stumps at the bowler’s end before the time agreed for the next interval has been reached.
Completion of an over
Other than at the end of the match,
if the agreed time for an interval is reached during an over, the over shall be completed before the interval is taken, except as provided for in clause 12.5.2.
when less than 3 minutes remains before the time agreed for the next interval, the interval shall be taken immediately if
either a batsman is dismissed or retires or the players have occasion to leave the field
whether this occurs during an over or at the end of an over. Except at the end of an innings, if an over is thus interrupted it shall be completed on the resumption of play.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Conclusion of match
The match is concluded
as soon as a result as defined in clauses 16.1 to 16.5 (The result) is reached.
as soon as the prescribed number of overs have been completed.
The match is concluded if, without a conclusion having been reached under 12.6.1, the players leave the field for adverse conditions of ground, weather or light, or in exceptional circumstances, and no further play is possible.
Hours of Play; Minimum Overs Requirement
To be determined by the Home Board subject to there being 2 sessions of 3.5 hours each, separated by a 45 minute interval between innings.
Note: The playing hours of matches scheduled to take place at venues where dew is likely to be a factor should be determined so as to ensure that the effect of any dew is minimised.
Minimum Over Rates
The minimum over rate to be achieved in ODI Matches shall be
14.28 overs per hour.
The actual over rate shall be calculated at the end of each innings by the umpires.
In calculating the actual over rate for the match, allowances will be given as follows:
The time lost as a result of treatment given to a player by an authorised medical personnel on the field of play;
The time lost as a result of a player being required to leave the field as a result of a serious injury;
The time taken for all third umpire referrals and consultations and any umpire or player reviews;
The time lost as a result of time wasting by the batting side; and
The time lost due to all other circumstances that are beyond the control of the fielding side.
In the event of any time allowances being granted to the fielding team under clause 12.8.3.4 above (time wasting by batting team), then such time shall be deducted from the allowances granted to such batting team in the determination of its over rate.
If a batting team is bowled out within the time determined for that innings pursuant to these playing conditions (taking into account all of the time allowances set out above), the fielding side shall be deemed to have complied with the required minimum over rate.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
12.8.6 The current over rate of the fielding team (+/- overs compared to the minimum rate required), to be advised by the 3rd umpire every 30 minutes as a minimum, shall be displayed on a scoreboard or replay screen.
INNINGS
Number of innings
A match shall be one innings for each side.
Alternate innings
Each side shall take their innings alternately.
Completed innings
A side’s innings is to be considered as completed if any of the following applies:
the side is all out.
at the fall of a wicket or the retirement of a batsman, further balls remain to be bowled but no further batsman is available to come in.
the prescribed number of overs have been bowled to the batting side.
The toss
The captains shall toss a coin for the choice of innings, on the field of play and under the supervision of the ICC Match Referee, not earlier than 30 minutes, nor later than 15 minutes before the scheduled or any rescheduled time for the start of play. Note, however, the provisions of clause 1.3 (Captain).
Decision to be notified
As soon as the toss is completed, the captain of the side winning the toss shall decide whether to bat or to field and shall notify the opposing captain and the umpires of this decision. Once notified, the decision cannot be changed.
Duration of Match
All matches will consist of one innings per side, each innings being limited to a maximum of 50 overs. All matches shall be of one day’s scheduled duration provided that participating countries in a series may agree to provide for a reserve day on
which an incomplete match may be replayed or continued from the scheduled day.
If the match is to be continued on the reserve day, every effort shall be made to complete the match on the scheduled day with any necessary reduction in overs taking place and only if the minimum number of overs necessary to constitute a match cannot be bowled on the scheduled day will the match be completed on the reserve day.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
13.6.3 If the match has started on the scheduled day and overs are subsequently reduced following an interruption, but no further play is possible, the match will resume on the reserve day under the same assumption that the last ball was played on the scheduled day. Refer to Appendix G.
Length of Innings
Uninterrupted Matches.
Each team shall bat for 50 overs unless all out earlier.
If the team fielding first fails to bowl the required number of overs by the scheduled time for cessation of the first innings, play shall continue until the required number of overs has been bowled. The interval shall be reduced to enable the second innings to commence at the scheduled time, subject to there being a minimum interval of 30 minutes. The team batting second shall receive its full quota of 50 overs irrespective of the number of overs it bowled in the scheduled time for the cessation of the first innings.
If the team batting first is dismissed in less than 50 overs, the team batting second shall be entitled to bat for 50 overs.
If the team fielding second fails to bowl 50 overs by the scheduled cessation time, the hours of play shall be extended until the required number of overs has been bowled or a result is achieved.
Penalties shall apply for slow over rates (refer to the ICC Code of Conduct).
Delayed or Interrupted Matches
Delay or Interruption to the Innings of the Team Batting First (see paragraph 1 of Appendix E)
When playing time has been lost the revised number of overs to be bowled in the match shall be based on a rate of 14.28 overs per hour, which is inclusive of the provision of drinks intervals, in the total remaining time available for play.
The revision of the number of overs should ensure, whenever possible, that both teams have the opportunity of batting
for the same number of overs. The team batting second shall not bat for a greater number of overs than the first team unless the latter completed its innings in less than its allocated overs. To constitute a match, a minimum of 20 overs have to be bowled to the side batting second, subject to a result not being achieved earlier.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
As soon as the total minutes of playing time remaining is less than the completed overs faced by Team 1 multiplied by 4.2, then the first innings is terminated and the provisions of 13.7.2.2 below take effect.
A fixed time will be specified for the commencement of the interval, and also the close of play for the match, by applying a rate of 14.28 overs per hour.
When calculating the length of playing time available for the match, or the length of either innings, the timing and duration of all relative delays, extensions in playing hours, interruptions in play, and intervals, excluding those for drinks, will be taken
into consideration. This calculation must not cause the match to finish earlier than the original or rescheduled time for cessation of play on the final scheduled day for play. If required the original time shall be extended to allow for one extra over for each team.
If the team fielding first fails to bowl the revised number of overs by the specified time, play shall continue until the required number of overs have been bowled or the innings is completed.
Penalties shall apply for slow over rates (refer to the ICC Code of Conduct).
Delay or Interruption to the innings of the Team Batting Second (see paragraph 2 of Appendix E)
When playing time has been lost and, as a result, it is not possible for the team
batting second to have the opportunity of receiving its allocated, or revised allocation of overs in the playing time available, the number of overs shall be reduced at a rate of 14.28 overs per hour, which is inclusive of the provision of drinks intervals, in respect of the lost playing time. Should the calculations result in a fraction of an over the fraction shall be ignored.
In addition, should the innings of the team batting first have been completed prior
to the scheduled, or re-scheduled time for the commencement of the interval, then any calculation relating to the revision of overs shall not be effective until an amount of time equivalent to that by which the second innings started early has elapsed.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Extra Time
To constitute a match, a minimum of 20 overs have to be bowled to the team batting second subject to a result not being achieved earlier.
The team batting second shall not bat for a greater number of overs than the first team unless the latter completed its innings in less than its allocated overs.
A fixed time will be specified for the close of play by applying a rate of 14.28 overs per hour. With the exception of drinks intervals, the timing and duration of all relative delays, extensions in playing hours and interruptions in play, will be taken into consideration in specifying this time.
If the team fielding second fails to bowl the revised overs by the scheduled or re-scheduled close of play, the hours of
play shall be extended until the overs have been bowled or a result achieved.
Penalties shall apply for slow over rates (refer to the ICC Code of Conduct).
The participating countries may agree to provide for extra time where the start of play is delayed or play is suspended.
Number of Overs per Bowler
No bowler shall bowl more than 10 overs in an innings.
In a delayed or interrupted match where the overs are reduced for both teams or for the team bowling second, no bowler may bowl more than one-fifth of the total overs allowed.
Where the total overs is not divisible by 5, one additional over shall be allowed to the maximum number per bowler necessary to make up the balance.
In the event of a bowler breaking down and being unable to complete an over, the remaining balls will be allowed by another bowler. Such part of an over will count as a full over only in so far as each bowler’s limit is concerned.
The scoreboard shall show the total number of overs bowled and the number of overs bowled by each bowler.
THE FOLLOW-ON
Shall not apply.
DECLARATION AND FORFEITURE
Shall not apply.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
THE RESULT
A Win – one-innings match
The side which has scored in its one innings a total of runs in excess of that scored by the opposing side in its one completed innings shall win the match. See clause 13.3 (Completed innings). Note also clause 16.5 (Winning hit or extras).
Save for circumstances where a match is awarded to a team as a consequence of the opposing team’s refusal to play (clause 16.2), a result can be achieved only if both teams have had the opportunity of batting for at least 20 overs, unless one team has been all out in less than 20 overs or unless the team batting second scores enough runs to win in less than 20 overs.
Save for circumstances where a match is awarded to a team as a consequence of the opposing team’s refusal to play (clause 16.2), all matches in which both teams have not had an opportunity of batting for a minimum of 20 overs, shall be declared a No Result.
ICC Match Referee awarding a match
A match shall be lost by a side which either
concedes defeat or
in the opinion of the ICC Match Referee refuses to play and the ICC Match Referee shall award the match to the other side.
If an umpire considers that an action by any player or players might constitute a refusal by either side to play then the umpires together shall inform the ICC Match Referee of this fact. The
ICC Match Referee shall together with the umpires ascertain the cause of the action. If the ICC Match Referee, after due
consultation with the umpires, then decides that this action does constitute a refusal to play by one side, he/she shall so inform the captain of that side. If the captain persists in the action the ICC Match Referee shall award the match in accordance with clause 16.2.1.2 above.
If action as in clause 16.2.2 above takes place after play has started and does not constitute a refusal to play the delay or interruption in play shall be dealt with in the same manner as provided for in clauses 13.7.2 (Delayed and Interrupted Matches) and 11.4 (Changing agreed times for intervals) above.
Note: In addition to the consequences of any refusal to play prescribed under this clause, any such refusal, whether
temporary or final, may result in disciplinary action being taken against the captain and team responsible under the ICC Code of Conduct.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
All other matches – A Tie or No Result
A Tie
The result of a match shall be a Tie when all innings have been completed and the scores are equal.
If the scores are equal, the result shall be a tie and no account shall be taken of the number of wickets that have fallen.
No Result
See 16.1.3 above.
Prematurely Terminated Matches - Calculation of the Target Score
Interrupted Matches – Calculation of the Target Score
If, due to suspension of play after the start of the match, the number of overs in the innings of either team has to be revised to a lesser number than originally allotted (minimum of 20 overs), then a revised target score (to win) should be set for the number of overs which the team batting second will have the opportunity of facing. This revised target is to be calculated using the current Duckworth/Lewis/ Stern method. The target set will always be a whole number and one run less will constitute a Tie (refer to the Duckworth/Lewis/Stern Regulations).
Prematurely Terminated Matches
If the innings of the side batting second is suspended (with at least 20 overs bowled) and it is not possible for the match to be resumed, the match will be decided by comparison with the DLS ‘Par Score’ determined at the instant of the suspension by the Duckworth/Lewis/Stern method (refer Duckworth/ Lewis/Stern Regulations). If the score is equal to the par score, the match is a Tie. Otherwise the result is a victory, or defeat, by the margin of runs by which the score exceeds, or falls short of, the Par Score.
Winning hit or extras
As soon as a result is reached as defined in clauses 16.1, 16.2 or 16.3.1, the match is at an end. Nothing that happens thereafter, except as in clause 41.18.2 (Penalty runs), shall be regarded as part of it. Note also clause 16.8.
The side batting last will have scored enough runs to win only if its total of runs is sufficient without including any runs completed by the batsmen before the completion of a catch, or the obstruction of a catch, from which the striker could
be dismissed.
If a boundary is scored before the batsmen have completed sufficient runs to win the match, the whole of the boundary allowance shall be credited to the side’s total and, in the case of a hit by the bat, to the striker’s score.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Statement of result
If the side batting last wins the match without losing all its wickets, the result shall be stated as a win by the number of wickets still then to fall.
If, without having scored a total of runs in excess of the total scored by the opposing side, the side batting last has lost all its wickets, but as the result of an award of 5 Penalty runs its total of runs is then sufficient to win, the result shall be stated as a win to that side by Penalty runs.
If the side fielding last wins the match, the result shall be stated as a win by runs.
If the match is decided by one side conceding defeat or refusing to play, the result shall be stated as Match Conceded or Match Awarded, as the case may be.
Correctness of result
Any decision as to the correctness of the scores shall be the responsibility of the umpires. See clause 2.15 (Correctness of scores).
Mistakes in scoring
If, after the players and umpires have left the field in the belief that the match has been concluded, the umpires discover that a mistake in
scoring has occurred which affects the result then, subject to clause 16.9, they shall adopt the following procedure.
If, when the players leave the field, the side batting last has not completed its innings and
either the number of overs to be bowled in that innings has not been completed, or
the end of the innings has not been reached,
then, unless one side concedes defeat, the umpires shall order play to resume.
Unless a result is reached sooner, play will then continue, if conditions permit, until the prescribed number of overs has been completed. The number of overs shall be taken as they were at the call of Time for the supposed conclusion of the match. No account shall be taken of the time between that moment and the resumption of play.
If, at this call of Time, the overs have been completed and no Playing time remains, or if the side batting last has completed its innings, the umpires shall immediately inform both captains of the necessary corrections to the scores and to the result.
Result not to be changed
Once the umpires have agreed with the scorers the correctness of the scores at the conclusion of the match – see clauses 2.15 (Correctness of scores) and 3.2 (Correctness of scores) – the result cannot thereafter be changed.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Points
Preliminary Matches
In a competition with three or four Members with ODI status and with a final match or series, the home Board will institute a points system as follows:
Win, with bonus point
Win, without bonus point
Tie or No Result
Loss
In the event of teams finishing on equal points, the right to play in the final match or series will be determined as follows:
The team with the most number of wins
If still equal, the team with the most number of wins over the other team(s) who are equal on points and have the same number of wins
If still equal, the team with the highest number of bonus points
If still equal, the team with the highest net run rate
In a match declared as a No Result, run rate is not applicable.
Net Run Rate
A team’s net run rate is calculated by deducting from the average runs per over scored by that team throughout the competition, the average runs per over scored against that team throughout the competition.
In the event of a team being all out in less than its full quota of overs, the calculation of its net run rate shall be based on the full quota of overs to which it would have been entitled and not on the number of overs in which the team was dismissed.
Only those matches where results are achieved will count for the purpose of net run rate calculations. Where a match is abandoned, but a result is achieved under Duckworth/Lewis/ Stern, for net run rate purposes Team 1 will be credited with Team 2’s Par Score on abandonment off the same number
of overs faced by Team 2.Where a match is concluded with Duckworth/Lewis/Stern having been applied at an earlier point in the match, Team 1 will be credited with 1 run less than the final Target Score for Team 2 off the total number of overs allocated to Team 2 to reach the target.
Bonus Points
The team that achieves a run rate of 1.25 times that of the opposition shall be awarded one bonus point. A team’s run rate will be calculated by reference to the runs scored in an innings divided by the number of overs faced. Refer to Appendix F.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
THE OVER
Number of balls
The ball shall be bowled from each end alternately in overs of 6 balls.
Start of an over
An over has started when the bowler starts his run-up or, if there is no run-up, starts his action for the first delivery of that over.
Validity of balls
A ball shall not count as one of the 6 balls of the over unless it is delivered, even though, as in clause 41.16 (Non-striker leaving his ground early) a batsman may be dismissed or some other incident occurs without the ball having been delivered.
A ball delivered by the bowler shall not count as one of the 6 balls of the over:
if it is called dead, or is to be considered dead, before the striker has had an opportunity to play it. See clause 20.6 (Dead ball; ball counting as one of over).
if it is called dead in the circumstances of clause
20.4.2.6. Note also the special provisions of clause
20.4.2.5 (Umpire calling and signaling Dead ball)
if it is a No ball. See clause 21 (No ball).
if it is a Wide. See clause 22 (Wide ball).
when any of clauses 24.4 (Player returning without permission), 28.2 (Fielding the ball), 41.4 (Deliberate attempt to distract striker), or 41.5 (Deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman) is applied.
Any deliveries other than those listed in clauses 17.3.1 and 17.3.2 shall be known as valid balls. Only valid balls shall count towards the 6 balls of the over.
Call of Over
When 6 valid balls have been bowled and when the ball becomes dead, the umpire shall call Over before leaving the wicket. See also clause 20.3 (Call of Over or Time).
Umpire miscounting
If the umpire miscounts the number of valid balls, the over as counted by the umpire shall stand.
If, having miscounted, the umpire allows an over to continue after 6 valid balls have been bowled, he/she may subsequently call Over when the ball becomes dead after any delivery, even if that delivery is not a valid ball.
Whenever possible, the third umpire shall liaise with the scorers and if possible inform the on-field umpires if the over has been miscounted.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Bowler  changing ends
A bowler shall be allowed to change ends as often as desired, provided he does not bowl two overs consecutively, nor bowl parts of each of two consecutive overs, in the same innings.
Finishing an over
Other than at the end of an innings, a bowler shall finish an over in progress unless incapacitated or suspended under these Playing Conditions.
If for any reason, other than the end of an innings, an over is left uncompleted at the start of an interval or interruption, it shall be completed on resumption of play.
Bowler incapacitated or suspended during an over
If for any reason a bowler is incapacitated while running up to deliver the first ball of an over, or is incapacitated or suspended during an over, the umpire shall call and signal Dead ball. Another bowler shall complete the over from the same end, provided that he does not bowl two overs consecutively, nor bowl parts of each of two consecutive overs,
in that innings.
SCORING RUNS
A run
The score shall be reckoned by runs. A run is scored:
so often as the batsmen, at any time while the ball is in play, have crossed and made good their ground from end to end.
when a boundary is scored. See clause 19 (Boundaries).
when Penalty runs are awarded. See clause 18.6.
Runs disallowed
Wherever in these Playing Conditions provision is made for the scoring of runs or awarding of penalties, such runs and penalties will be subject to any provisions that may be applicable for the disallowance of runs or for the non-award of penalties.
When runs are disallowed, the one run penalty for No ball or Wide shall stand and 5 run penalties shall be allowed, except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
Short runs
A run is short if a batsman fails to make good his ground in turning for a further run.
Although a short run shortens the succeeding one, the latter if completed shall not be regarded as short. A striker setting off for the first run from in front of the popping crease may do so also without penalty.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Unintentional short runs
Except in the circumstances of clause 18.5,
if either batsman runs a short run, the umpire concerned shall, unless a boundary is scored, call and signal Short run as soon as the ball becomes dead and that run shall not be scored.
if, after either or both batsmen run short, a boundary is scored the umpire concerned shall disregard the short running and shall not call or signal Short run.
if both batsmen run short in one and the same run, this shall be regarded as only one short run.
if more than one run is short then, subject to clauses 18.4.2 and 18.4.3, all runs called as short shall not be scored.
if there has been more than one short run, the umpire shall inform the scorers as to the number of runs to be recorded.
Deliberate short runs
If either umpire considers that one or both batsmen deliberately ran short at that umpire’s end, the umpire concerned shall, when the ball is dead, call and signal Short run and inform the other umpire of what has occurred and apply clause 18.5.2.
The bowler’s end umpire shall
disallow all runs to the batting side
return any not out batsman to his original end
signal No ball or Wide to the scorers, if applicable
award 5 Penalty runs to the fielding side
award any other 5-run Penalty that is applicable except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side)
inform the scorers as to the number of runs to be recorded, and
inform the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of the reason for this action.
Runs awarded for penalties
Runs shall be awarded for penalties under clause 18.5 (Deliberate short runs), 24.4 (Player returning without permission), 26.4 (Penalties for contravention), 21 (No ball), 22 (Wide ball), 28.2(Fielding the ball), 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side) 41 (Unfair play) and 42 (Players’ conduct). Note, however, the restrictions on the award of
Penalty runs in clauses 23.3 (Leg byes not to be awarded), 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side) and 34 (Hit the ball twice).
Runs scored for boundaries
Runs shall be scored for boundary allowances under clause 19 (Boundaries).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Runs scored when a batsman is dismissed
When a batsman is dismissed, any runs for penalties awarded to either side shall stand.
No other runs shall be credited to the batting side, except as follows.
If a batsman is dismissed Obstructing the field, the batting side shall also score any runs completed before the offence.
If, however, the obstruction prevented a catch being made, no runs other than penalties shall be scored.
If a batsman is dismissed Run out, the batting side shall also score any runs completed before the wicket was put down.
Runs scored when the ball becomes dead other than at the fall of a wicket
When the ball becomes dead for any reason other than the fall of a wicket, or is called dead by an umpire, unless there is specific provision otherwise in these Playing Conditions, any runs for penalties awarded to either side shall be scored. Note however the provisions of clauses 23.3 (Leg byes not to be awarded) and 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
Additionally the batting side shall be credited with all runs completed by the batsmen before the incident or call of Dead ball and the run in
progress if the batsmen had already crossed at the instant of the incident or call of Dead ball. Note specifically, however, the provisions of clause
41.5.8 (Deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman).
Crediting of runs scored
Unless stated otherwise in these Playing Conditions,
if the ball is struck by the bat, all runs scored by the batting side shall be credited to the striker, except for the following:
an award of 5 Penalty runs, which shall be scored as Penalty runs
the one run penalty for a No ball, which shall be scored as a No ball extra
if the ball is not struck by the bat, runs shall be scored as Penalty runs, Byes, Leg byes, No ball extras or Wides as the case may
be. If Byes or Leg byes accrue from a No ball, only the one run penalty for No ball shall be scored as such, and the remainder as Byes or Leg byes as appropriate.
the bowler shall be debited with:
all runs scored by the striker
all runs scored as No ball extras
all runs scored as Wides
Batsman returning to original end
When the striker is dismissed in any of the circumstances in clauses 18.11.1.1 to 18.11.1.5, the not out batsman shall return to his original end.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Bowled.
Stumped.
Hit the ball twice.
LBW.
Hit wicket.
The batsmen shall return to their original ends in any of the cases of clauses 18.11.2.1 to 18.11.2.3.
A boundary is scored.
Runs are disallowed for any reason.
A decision by the batsmen at the wicket to do so, under clause 41.5 (Deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman).
Batsman returning to wicket he has left
When a batsman is dismissed in any of the ways in clauses 18.12.1.1 to 18.12.1.3, the not out batsman shall return to the wicket he has left but only if the batsmen had not already crossed at the instant of the incident causing the dismissal. If runs are to be disallowed, however, the not out batsman shall return to his original end.
Caught
Obstructing the field
Run out
If, while a run is in progress, the ball becomes dead for any reason other than the dismissal of a batsman, the batsmen shall return to the wickets they had left, but only if they had not already crossed in running when the ball became dead. If, however, any of the circumstances of clauses 18.11.2.1 to 18.11.2.3 apply, the batsmen shall return to their original ends.
BOUNDARIES
Determining the boundary of the field of play
Before the toss, the umpires shall determine the boundary of the field of play, which shall be fixed for the duration of the match. See clause 2.3.4 (Consultation with Home Board).
The boundary shall be determined such that no part of any sight- screen, will, at any stage of the match, be within the field of play.
The aim shall be to maximize the size of the playing area at each venue. With respect to the size of the boundaries, no boundary shall be longer than 90 yards (82.29 meters), and no boundary should be shorter than 65 yards (59.43 metres) from the centre of the pitch to be used.
At all times, there must be 3 yards (2.74 meters) from the boundary rope to the first solid object (advertising boards/LEDs, photographers, cameramen, dug outs, covers, perimeter fence) for the player’s safety run off.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
If the boundary is positioned less than 90 yards (82.29 meters) from the centre of the pitch, the boundary rope cannot be set at a distance of more than 10 yards (9.14 meters) from the perimeter fence. The 10 yards shall be inclusive of the 3 yards (2.74 meters) provided for the player’s safety run off.
Any ground which has previously been approved to host international cricket which is unable to conform to the minimum boundary dimension shall be exempt. In such cases the boundary shall be positioned so as to maximize the size of the playing area.
Identifying and marking the boundary
All boundaries must be designated by a rope, or similar object of a minimum standard as authorised by the ICC from time to time.
If the boundary is marked by means of an object that is in contact with the ground the boundary will be the edge of the grounded part of the object which is nearest the pitch.
An obstacle within the field of play shall not be regarded as a boundary unless so determined by the umpires before the toss. See clause 2.3.4 (Consultation with Home Board).
If an unauthorized person enters the playing arena and handles the ball, the umpire at the bowler’s end shall be the sole judge of whether the boundary allowance should be scored or the ball be treated as still in play or called dead ball if a batsman is liable to be out as a result of the unauthorized person handling the ball.
Restoring the boundary
If a solid object used to mark the boundary is disturbed for any reason, then:
the boundary shall be considered to be in its original position.
the object shall be returned to its original position as soon as is practicable; if play is taking place, this shall be as soon as the ball is dead.
if some part of a fence or other marker has come within the field of play, that part shall be removed from the field of play as soon as is practicable; if play is taking place, this shall be as soon as the ball is dead.
Ball grounded beyond the boundary
The ball in play is grounded beyond the boundary if it touches
the boundary or any part of an object used to mark the boundary;
the ground beyond the boundary;
any object that is grounded beyond the boundary.
The ball in play is to be regarded as being grounded beyond the boundary if
a fielder, grounded beyond the boundary as in clause 19.5, touches the ball;
a fielder, after catching the ball within the boundary, becomes grounded beyond the boundary while in contact with the ball, before completing the catch.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Fielder grounded beyond the boundary
A fielder is grounded beyond the boundary if some part of his person is in contact with any of the following:
the boundary or any part of an object used to mark the boundary;
the ground beyond the boundary;
any object that is in contact with the ground beyond the boundary;
another fielder who is grounded beyond the boundary.
A fielder who is not in contact with the ground is considered to be grounded beyond the boundary if his final contact with the ground, before his first contact with the ball after it has been delivered by the bowler, was not entirely within the boundary.
Boundary allowances
6 runs shall be allowed for a boundary 6; and 4 runs for a boundary 4. See also clause 19.7.
Runs scored from boundaries
A boundary 6 will be scored if and only if the ball has been struck by the bat and is first grounded beyond the boundary without having been in contact with the ground within the field of play. This shall apply even if the ball has previously touched a fielder.
A boundary 4 will be scored when a ball that is grounded beyond the boundary:
whether struck by the bat or not, was first grounded within the boundary, or
has not been struck by the bat.
When a boundary is scored, the batting side, except in the circumstances of clause 19.8, shall be awarded whichever is the greater of:
the allowance for the boundary
the runs completed by the batsmen together with the run in progress if they had already crossed at the instant the boundary is scored.
When the runs in clause 19.7.3.2 exceed the boundary allowance they shall replace the boundary allowance for the purposes of clause 18.12.2.
The scoring of Penalty runs by either side is not affected by the scoring of a boundary.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Overthrow or wilful act of fielder
If the boundary results from an overthrow or from the wilful act of a fielder, the runs scored shall be
any runs for penalties awarded to either side and the allowance for the boundary
and the runs completed by the batsmen, together with the run in progress if they had already crossed at the instant of the throw or act.
Clause 18.12.2 (Batsman returning to wicket he has left) shall apply as from the instant of the throw or act.
DEAD BALL
Ball is dead
The ball becomes dead when
it is finally settled in the hands of the wicket-keeper or of the bowler.
a boundary is scored. See clause 19.7 (Runs scored from boundaries).
a batsman is dismissed. The ball will be deemed
to be dead from the instant of the incident causing the dismissal.
whether played or not it becomes trapped between the bat and person of a batsman or between items of his clothing or equipment.
whether played or not it lodges in the clothing or equipment of a batsman or the clothing of an umpire.
there is an award of Penalty runs under either of clauses 24.4 (Player returning without permission) or
28.3 (Fielding the ball). The ball shall not count as one of the over.
there is a contravention of clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
the match is concluded in any of the ways stated in clause 12.6 (Conclusion of match).
The ball shall be considered to be dead when it is clear to the bowler’s end umpire that the fielding side and both batsmen at the wicket have ceased to regard it as in play.
In a match where cameras are being used on or over the field of play (e.g. Spidercam), should a ball that has been hit by the batsman make contact, while still in play, with the camera, its apparatus or its cable, either umpire shall call and signal ‘dead
ball’. The ball shall not count as one of the over and no runs shall be scored. If the delivery was called a No ball it shall count and the No ball penalty shall be applied. No other runs (including penalty runs) apart from the No ball penalty shall be scored.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Should a ball thrown by a fielder make contact with a camera on or over the field of play, its apparatus or its cable, either umpire shall call and signal dead ball. Unless this was already a No ball or Wide, the ball shall count as one of the over. All runs scored to that point shall count, plus the run in progress if the batsmen have already crossed.
Refer also to paragraph 2.6 of Appendix D.
Ball finally settled
Whether the ball is finally settled or not is a matter for the umpire alone to decide.
Call of Over or Time
Neither the call of Over (see clause 17.4), nor the call of Time (see clause 12.2) is to be made until the ball is dead, either under clauses 20.1 or 20.4.
Umpire calling and signalling Dead ball
When the ball has become dead under clause 20.1, the bowler’s end umpire may call and signal Dead ball if it is necessary to inform the players.
Either umpire shall call and signal Dead ball when
intervening in a case of unfair play.
a possibly serious injury to a player or umpire occurs.
leaving his/her normal position for consultation.
one or both bails fall from the striker’s wicket before the striker has had the opportunity of playing the ball.
the striker is not ready for the delivery of the ball and, if the ball is delivered, makes no attempt to play it. Provided the umpire is satisfied that the striker had adequate reason for not being ready, the ball shall not count as one of the over.
the striker is distracted by any noise or movement or in any other way while preparing to receive, or receiving a delivery. This shall apply whether the source of the distraction is within the match or outside it. Note also clause 20.4.2.7. The ball shall not count as one of the over.
there is an instance of a deliberate attempt to distract under either of clauses 41.4 (Deliberate attempt
to distract striker) or 41.5 (Deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman). The ball shall not count as one of the over.
the bowler drops the ball accidentally before delivery.
the ball does not leave the bowler’s hand for any reason other than an attempt to run out the
non-striker under clause 41.16 (Non-striker leaving his ground early).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
satisfied that the ball in play cannot be recovered.
required to do so under any of the Playing Conditions not included above.
Ball ceases to be dead
The ball ceases to be dead – that is, it comes into play – when the bowler starts his run-up or, if there is no run-up, starts his bowling action.
Dead ball; ball counting as one of over
When a ball which has been delivered is called dead or is to be considered dead then, other than as in clause 20.6.2,
it will not count in the over if the striker has not had an opportunity to play it.
Unless No ball or Wide ball has been called, it will be a valid ball if the striker has had an opportunity to play it, except in the circumstances of clauses 20.4.2.6 and 24.4 ( Player returning without permission), 28.2 (Fielding the ball), 41.4 (Deliberate attempt to distract striker) and 41.5 (Deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman).
In clause 20.4.2.5, the ball will not count in the over only if both conditions of not attempting to play the ball and having an adequate reason for not being ready are met. Otherwise the delivery will be a valid ball.
NO BALL
Mode of delivery
The umpire shall ascertain whether the bowler intends to bowl right handed or left handed, over or round the wicket, and shall so inform the striker.
It is unfair if the bowler fails to notify the umpire of a change in his mode of delivery. In this case the umpire shall call and signal No ball.
Underarm bowling shall not be permitted.
Fair delivery – the arm
For a delivery to be fair in respect of the arm the ball must not be delivered with an Illegal Bowling Action.
An Illegal Bowling Action is defined as a bowling action where a bowler’s Elbow Extension exceeds 15 degrees, measured from the point at which the bowling arm reaches the horizontal until the point at which the ball is released (any Elbow Hyperextension shall be discounted for the purposes of determining an Illegal Bowling Action).
Should either umpire or the ICC Match Referee suspect that a bowler has used an Illegal Bowling Action, they shall complete the ICC Bowling Action Report Form at the conclusion of the match, as set out in the Illegal Bowling Regulations.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Ball thrown or delivered underarm – action by umpires
If, in the opinion of either umpire, the ball has been thrown (where such mode of delivery does not correspond to the bowler’s normal bowling action) or delivered underarm, he/she shall call and signal No ball and, when the ball is dead, inform the other umpire of the reason for the call.
The bowler’s end umpire shall then
warn the bowler, indicating that this is a first and final warning. This warning shall apply to that bowler throughout the innings.
inform the captain of the fielding side of the reason for this action.
inform the batsmen at the wicket of what has occurred.
If either umpire considers that, in that innings, a further delivery by the same bowler is thrown (where such mode of delivery does not correspond to the bowler’s normal bowling action)
or delivered underarm, he/she shall call and signal No ball and when the ball is dead inform the other umpire of the reason for the call.
The bowler’s end umpire shall then
direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling. The over shall, if applicable, be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled the previous over or part thereof nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over. The bowler thus suspended shall not bowl again in that innings.
inform the batsmen at the wicket and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of the reason for this action.
The umpires together shall report the occurrence as soon as possible after the match to the ICC Match Referee, who
shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
Bowler throwing towards striker’s end before delivery
If the bowler throws the ball towards the striker’s end before entering the delivery stride, either umpire shall call and signal No ball. See clause
41.17 (Batsmen stealing a run).
However, the procedure stated in clause 21.3 of caution, informing, final warning, action against the bowler and reporting shall not apply.
Fair delivery – the feet
For a delivery to be fair in respect of the feet, in the delivery stride
the bowler’s back foot must land within and not touching the return crease appertaining to his stated mode of delivery.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
the bowler’s front foot must land with some part of the foot, whether grounded or raised:
on the same side of the imaginary line joining the two middle stumps as the return crease described in clause 21.5.1, and
behind the popping crease.
If the bowler’s end umpire is satisfied that any of these three conditions have not been met, he/she shall call and signal No ball. See clause 41.8 (Bowling of deliberate front foot No ball).
Bowler breaking wicket in delivering ball
Either umpire shall call and signal No ball if, other than in an attempt to run out the non-striker under clause 41.16, the bowler breaks the wicket at any time after the ball comes into play and before completion of the stride after the delivery stride. This shall include any clothing or other object that falls from his person and breaks the wicket.
Ball bouncing more than once, rolling along the ground or pitching off the pitch
The umpire shall call and signal No ball if a ball which he/she considers to have been delivered, without having previously touched bat or person of the striker,
bounces more than once
or rolls along the ground before it reaches the popping crease
or pitches wholly or partially off the pitch as defined in clause 6.1 (Area of pitch) before it reaches the line of the striker’s wicket.
Ball coming to rest in front of striker’s wicket
If a ball delivered by the bowler comes to rest in front of the line of the striker’s wicket, without having previously touched the bat or person of the striker, the umpire shall call and signal No ball and immediately call and signal Dead ball.
Fielder intercepting a delivery
If except in the circumstances of clause 27.3 (Position of wicket-keeper) a ball, delivered by the bowler, makes contact with any part of a fielder’s person before it either makes contact with the striker’s bat or person, or it passes the striker’s wicket, the umpire shall call and signal No ball and immediately call and signal Dead ball.
Ball bouncing over head height of striker
See clauses 22.1.1.2 and 41.6.1.7.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Call of No ball for infringement of other clauses
In addition to the instances above, No ball is to be called and signalled as required by the following:
Clause 27.3 – Position of wicket-keeper Clause 28.4 – Limitation of on side fielders
Clause 28.5 – Fielders not to encroach on pitch
Clause 41.6 – Bowling of dangerous and unfair short pitched deliveries Clause 41.7 – Bowling of dangerous and unfair non-pitching deliveries Clause 41.8 – Bowling of deliberate front foot No ball
Revoking a call of No ball
An umpire shall revoke the call of No ball if Dead ball is called under any of clauses 20.4.2.4 to 20.4.2.9 (Umpire calling and signaling Dead ball). However, if a no ball is called in breach of clause 20.4.2.7 (41.4 - Deliberate attempt to distract striker before playing the ball or 41.5 – Deliberate attempt of Distraction, Deception or Obstruction of striker after the stroke) the No ball will stand.
No ball to over-ride Wide
A call of No ball shall over-ride the call of Wide ball at any time. See clauses 22.1 (Judging a Wide) and 22.2 (Call and signal of Wide ball).
Ball not dead
The ball does not become dead on the call of No ball.
Penalty for a No ball
A penalty of one run shall be awarded instantly on the call of No ball. Unless the call is revoked, the penalty shall stand even if a batsman is dismissed. It shall be in addition to any other runs scored, any boundary allowance and any other runs awarded for penalties.
Runs resulting from a No ball – how scored
The one run penalty shall be scored as a No ball extra and shall be debited against the bowler. If other Penalty runs have been awarded to either side these shall be scored as stated in clause 41.18 (Penalty runs). Any runs completed by the batsmen or any boundary allowance shall be credited to the striker if the ball has been struck by the bat; otherwise they shall also be scored as Byes or Leg byes as appropriate.
No ball not to count
A No ball shall not count as one of the over. See clause 17.3 (Validity of balls).
Out from a No ball
When No ball has been called, neither batsman shall be out under any of the Playing Conditions except clause 34 (Hit the ball twice), clause 37 (Obstructing the field) or clause 38 (Run out).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Free Hit
In addition to the above, the delivery following a No ball called (all modes of No ball) shall be a free hit for whichever batsman is facing it. If the delivery for the free hit is not a legitimate delivery (any kind of No ball or a Wide ball) then the next delivery will become a free hit for whichever batsman is facing it.
For any free hit, the striker can be dismissed only under the circumstances that apply for a No ball, even if the delivery for the free hit is called Wide.
Neither field changes nor the exchange of individuals between fielding positions are permitted for free hit deliveries unless:
There is a change of striker (the provisions of clause
41.2 shall apply), or
The No Ball was the result of a fielding restriction breach, in which case the field may be changed to the extent of correcting the breach.
For clarity, the bowler can change his mode of delivery for the free hit delivery. In such circumstances clause 21.1 shall apply.
The umpires will signal a free hit by (after the normal No Ball signal) extending one arm straight upwards and moving it in a circular motion.
WIDE BALL
Judging a Wide
If the bowler bowls a ball, not being a No ball, the umpire shall adjudge it a Wide if, according to the definition in clause 22.1.2:
the ball passes wide of where the striker is standing and which also would have passed wide of the striker standing in a normal guard position.
the ball passes above the head height of the striker standing upright at the popping crease.
The ball will be considered as passing wide of the striker unless it is sufficiently within reach for him to be able to hit it with the bat by means of a normal cricket stroke.
Umpires are instructed to apply very strict and consistent interpretation in regard to this clause in order to prevent negative bowling wide of the wicket.
Call and signal of Wide ball
If the umpire adjudges a delivery to be a Wide he/she shall call and signal Wide ball as soon as the ball passes the striker’s wicket. It shall, however, be considered to have been a Wide from the instant that the bowler entered his delivery stride, even though it cannot be called Wide until it passes the striker’s wicket.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Revoking a call of Wide ball
The umpire shall revoke the call of Wide ball if there is then any contact between the ball and the striker’s bat or person before the ball comes into contact with any fielder.
The umpire shall revoke the call of Wide ball if a delivery is called a No ball. See clause 21.13 (No ball to over-ride Wide).
Delivery not a Wide
The umpire shall not adjudge a delivery as being a Wide, if the striker, by moving, either causes the ball to pass wide of him, as defined in clause 22.1.2 or brings the ball sufficiently within reach to be able to hit it by means of a normal cricket stroke.
The umpire shall not adjudge a delivery as being a Wide if the ball touches the striker’s bat or person, but only as the ball passes the striker.
Ball not dead
The ball does not become dead on the call of Wide ball.
Penalty for a Wide
A penalty of one run shall be awarded instantly on the call of Wide ball. Unless the call is revoked, see clause 22.3, this penalty shall stand even if a batsman is dismissed, and shall be in addition to any other runs scored, any boundary allowance and any other runs awarded for penalties.
Runs resulting from a Wide – how scored
All runs completed by the batsmen or a boundary allowance, together with the penalty for the Wide, shall be scored as Wide balls. Apart from any award of 5 Penalty runs, all runs resulting from a Wide shall be debited against the bowler.
Wide not to count
A Wide shall not count as one of the over. See clause 17.3 (Validity of balls).
Out from a Wide
When Wide ball has been called, neither batsman shall be out under any of the Playing Conditions except clause 35 (Hit wicket), clause 37 (Obstructing the field), clause 38 (Run out) or clause 39 (Stumped).
BYE AND LEG BYE
Byes
If the ball, delivered by the bowler, not being a Wide, passes the striker without touching his bat or person, any runs completed by the batsmen from that delivery, or a boundary allowance, shall be credited as Byes to the batting side. Additionally, if the delivery is a No ball, the one run penalty for such a delivery shall be incurred.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Leg byes
If a ball delivered by the bowler first strikes the person of the striker, runs shall be scored only if the umpire is satisfied that the striker has:
either attempted to play the ball with the bat or tried to avoid being hit by the ball.
If the umpire is satisfied that either of these conditions has been met runs shall be scored as follows.
If there is
either no subsequent contact with the striker’s bat or person, or
only inadvertent contact with the striker’s bat or person
any runs completed by the batsmen or a boundary allowance shall be credited to the striker in the case of subsequent contact with his bat but otherwise to the batting side as in clause 23.2.3.
If the striker wilfully makes a lawful second strike, clause 34.3 (Ball lawfully struck more than once) and clause 34.4 (Runs permitted from ball lawfully struck more than once) shall apply.
The runs in clause 23.2.2.1, unless credited to the striker, shall be scored as Leg byes.
Additionally, if the delivery is a No ball, the one run penalty for the No ball shall be incurred.
Leg byes not to be awarded
If in the circumstance of clause 23.2.1 the umpire considers that neither of the conditions therein has been met, then Leg byes shall not be awarded.
If the ball does not become dead for any other reason, the umpire shall call and signal Dead ball as soon as the ball reaches the boundary or at the completion of the first run.
The umpire shall then:
disallow all runs to the batting side;
return any not out batsman to his original end;
signal No ball to the scorers if applicable;
award any 5-run Penalty that is applicable except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
FIELDER’S ABSENCE; SUBSTITUTES
Substitute fielders
The umpires shall allow a substitute fielder
if they are satisfied that a fielder has been injured or become ill and that this occurred during the match, or
for any other wholly acceptable reason.
In all other circumstances, a substitute is not allowed.
A substitute shall not bowl or act as captain but may act as wicket-keeper only with the consent of the umpires. Note, however, clause 42.4.1.
A nominated player may bowl or field even though a substitute has previously acted for him, subject to 24.2 and 24.3.
Squad members of the fielding or batting team who are not playing in the match and who are not acting as substitute fielders shall be required to wear a team training bib whilst on the playing area (including the area between the boundary and the perimeter fencing).
Fielder absent or leaving the field of play
A player going briefly outside the boundary while carrying out any duties as a fielder is not absent from the field of play nor, for the purposes of this clause, is he to be regarded as having left the field of play.
If a fielder fails to take the field at the start of play or at any later time, or leaves the field during play,
an umpire shall be informed of the reason for this absence.
he shall not thereafter come on to the field of play during a session of play without the consent of the umpire. See clause 24.4. The umpire shall give such consent as soon as it is practicable.
If a player is absent from the field for longer than 8 minutes, the following restrictions shall apply to their future participation in the match:
The player shall not be permitted to bowl in the match until he has either been able to field, or his team has subsequently been batting, for the total length of playing time for which the player was absent (hereafter referred to as Penalty time). A player’s unexpired Penalty time shall be limited to a maximum of 120 minutes. If any unexpired Penalty time remains at the end of an innings, it is carried forward to the next and subsequent innings of the match.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
24.2.3.2 The player shall not be permitted to bat in the match until his team’s batting innings has been in progress for the length of playing time that is equal to the unexpired Penalty time carried forward from the previous innings. However, once his side has lost five wickets in its batting innings, he may bat immediately. If any unexpired penalty time remains at the end of that batting innings, it is carried forward to the next and subsequent innings of the match.
If the player leaves the field before having served all of his Penalty time, the balance is carried forward as unserved Penalty time.
On any occasion of absence, the amount of playing time for which the player is off the field shall be added to any Penalty time that remains unserved, subject to a maximum cumulative Penalty time of 120 minutes, and that player shall not bowl until all of his Penalty time has been served.
For the purposes of clauses 24.2.3.1 and 24.2.3.2, playing time shall comprise the time play is in progress excluding intervals, intervals between innings and official drinks intervals. For clarity, a player’s Penalty time will continue to expire after he is dismissed, for the remainder of his team’s batting innings.
If there is an unscheduled break in play, the stoppage time shall count as Penalty time served, provided that,
the fielder who was on the field of play at the start of the break either takes the field on the resumption of play, or his side is now batting.
the fielder who was already off the field at the start of the break notifies an umpire in person as soon as he is able to participate, and either takes the field on the resumption of play, or his side is now batting.
Stoppage time before an umpire has been so notified shall not count towards unserved Penalty time.
Any unserved Penalty time shall be carried forward into the next innings of the match, as applicable.
Penalty time not incurred
A nominated player’s absence will not incur Penalty time if,
he has suffered an external blow during the match and, as a result, has justifiably left the field or is unable to take the field.
in the opinion of the umpires, the player has been absent or has left the field for other wholly acceptable reasons, which shall not include illness or internal injury.
the player is absent from the field for a period of 8 minutes or less.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Player returning without permission
If a player comes on to the field of play in contravention of clause 24.2.2 and comes into contact with the ball while it is in play, the ball shall immediately become dead.
The umpire shall award 5 Penalty runs to the batting side.
Runs completed by the batsmen shall be scored together with the run in progress if they had already crossed at the instant of the offence.
The ball shall not count as one of the over.
The umpire shall inform the other umpire, the captain of the fielding side, the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of the reason for this action.
BATSMAN’S INNINGS
Eligibility to act as a batsman
Only a nominated player may bat and, subject to clause 25.3, may do so even though a substitute fielder has previously acted for him.
Commencement of a batsman’s innings
The innings of the first two batsmen, and that of any new batsman on the resumption of play after a call of Time, shall commence at the call of Play. At any other time, a batsman’s innings shall be considered to have commenced when that batsman first steps onto the field of play.
Restriction on batsman commencing an innings
If a member of the batting side has unserved Penalty time, see clause 24.2.7, that player shall not be permitted to bat until that Penalty time has been served. However, even if the unserved Penalty time has not expired, that player may bat after his side has lost 5 wickets.
A member of the batting side’s Penalty time is served during Playing time, in the event of an unscheduled stoppage, the stoppage time after the batsman notifies an umpire in person that he is able to participate shall count as Penalty time served.
If any unserved Penalty time remains at the end of a team’s innings, it shall be carried forward to the next innings of the match if appropriate.
Batsman retiring
A batsman may retire at any time during his innings when the ball is dead. The umpires, before allowing play to proceed, shall be informed of the reason for a batsman retiring.
If a batsman retires because of illness, injury or any other unavoidable cause, that batsman is entitled to resume his innings. If for any reason this does not happen, that batsman is to be recorded as ‘Retired – not out’.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
If a batsman retires for any reason other than as in clause 25.4.2, the innings of that batsman may be resumed only with the consent of the opposing captain. If for any reason his innings is not resumed, that batsman is to be recorded as ‘Retired – out’.
If after retiring a batsman resumes his innings, subject to the requirements of clauses 25.4.2 and 25.4.3, it shall be only at the fall of a wicket or the retirement of another batsman.
Runners
Runners shall not be permitted.
PRACTICE ON THE FIELD
Practice on the pitch or the rest of the square
There shall not be any practice on the pitch at any time.
There shall not be any practice on the rest of the square at any time except with the approval of the umpires.
If approved by the umpires, the use of the square for practice on any day of any match will be restricted to any netted practice area or bowling strips specifically prepared on the edge of the square for that purpose.
Bowling practice on the bowling strips referred to above shall also be permitted during the interval (and change of innings if not the interval) unless the umpires consider that, in the prevailing conditions of ground and weather, it will be detrimental to the surface of the square.
Practice on the outfield
On any day of the match, all forms of practice are permitted on the outfield
before the start of play
after the close of play, and
during the interval or between innings
providing the umpires are satisfied that such practice will not cause significant deterioration in the condition of the outfield.
Between the call of Play and the call of Time, practice shall be permitted on the outfield, providing that all of the following conditions are met:
only the fielders as defined in paragraph 7 of Appendix A participate in such practice.
no ball other than the match ball is used for this practice.
no bowling practice takes place in the area between the square and the boundary in a direction parallel to the match pitch.
the umpires are satisfied that it will not contravene either of clauses 41.3 (The match ball changing its condition) or 41.9 (Time wasting by the fielding side).
Bowling a ball, using a short run up to a player in the outfield is not to be regarded as bowling practice but shall be subject to the other conditions in this clause.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Trial run-up
A bowler is permitted to have a trial run-up provided the umpire is satisfied that it will not contravene either of clauses 41.9 (Time wasting by the fielding side) or 41.12 (Fielder damaging the pitch).
Penalties for contravention
All forms of practice are subject to the provisions of clauses 41.3 (The match ball – changing its condition), 41.9 (Time wasting by the fielding side) and 41.12 (Fielder damaging the pitch).
If there is a contravention of any of the provisions of clause 26.1 or 26.2, the umpire shall:
warn the player that the practice is not permitted;
inform the other umpire and, as soon as practicable, both captains of the reason for this action.
If the contravention is by a batsman at the wicket, the umpire shall inform the other batsman and each incoming batsman that the warning has been issued. The warning shall apply to the team of that player throughout the match.
If during the match there is any further contravention by any player of that team, the umpire shall:
award 5 Penalty runs to the opposing side;
inform the other umpire, the scorers and, as soon as practicable, both captains, and, if the contravention is during play, the batsmen at the wicket.
THE WICKET-KEEPER
Protective equipment
The wicket-keeper is the only fielder permitted to wear gloves and external leg guards. If these are worn, they are to be regarded as part of his person for the purposes of clause 28.2 (Fielding the ball). If by the
wicket-keeper’s actions and positioning when the ball comes into play it is apparent to the umpires that he will not be able to carry out the normal duties of a wicket-keeper, he shall forfeit this right and also the right to be recognised as a wicket-keeper for the purposes of clauses 33.2 (A fair catch), 39 (Stumped), 28.1 (Protective equipment), 28.4 (Limitation of
on-side fielders) and 28.5 (Fielders not to encroach on pitch).
Gloves
If, as permitted under clause 27.1, the wicket-keeper wears gloves, they shall have no webbing between the fingers except joining index finger and thumb, where webbing may be inserted as a means of support.
If used, the webbing shall be a single piece of non-stretch material which, although it may have facing material attached, shall have no reinforcements or tucks.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
27.2.3 The top edge of the webbing shall not protrude beyond the straight line joining the top of the index finger to the top of the thumb and shall be taut when a hand wearing the glove has the thumb fully extended. See paragraph 3 of Appendix B.
Position of wicket-keeper
The wicket-keeper shall remain wholly behind the wicket at the striker’s end from the moment the ball comes into play until a ball delivered by the bowler
touches the bat or person of the striker, or passes the wicket at the striker’s end, or the striker attempts a run.
In the event of the wicket-keeper contravening this clause, the striker’s end umpire shall call and signal No ball as soon as applicable after the delivery of the ball.
Movement by wicket-keeper
After the ball comes into play and before it reaches the striker, it is unfair if the wicket-keeper significantly alters his position in relation to the striker’s wicket, except for the following:
movement of a few paces forward for a slower delivery, unless in so doing it brings him within reach of the wicket.
lateral movement in response to the direction in which the ball has been delivered.
movement in response to the stroke that the striker is playing or that his actions suggest he intends to play. However the provisions of clause 27.3 shall apply.
In the event of unfair movement by the wicket-keeper, either umpire shall call and signal Dead ball.
Restriction on actions of wicket-keeper
If, in the opinion of either umpire, the wicket-keeper interferes with the striker’s right to play the ball and to guard his wicket, clause 20.4.2.6 (Umpire calling and signalling Dead ball) shall apply.
If, however, either umpire considers that the interference by the wicket- keeper was wilful, then clause 41.4 (Deliberate attempt to distract striker) shall also apply.
Interference with wicket-keeper by striker
If, in playing at the ball or in the legitimate defence of his wicket, the striker interferes with the wicket-keeper, he shall not be out except as provided for in clause 37.3 (Obstructing a ball from being caught).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
THE FIELDER
Protective equipment
No fielder other than the wicket-keeper shall be permitted to wear gloves or external leg guards. In addition, protection for the hand or fingers may be worn only with the consent of the umpires.
Fielding the ball
A fielder may field the ball with any part of his person (see paragraph 12 of Appendix A), except as in clause 28.2.1.2. However, he will be deemed to have fielded the ball illegally if, while the ball is in play he wilfully:
uses anything other than part of his person to field the ball.
extends his clothing with his hands and uses this to field the ball.
discards a piece of clothing, equipment or any other object which subsequently makes contact with the ball.
It is not illegal fielding if the ball in play makes contact with a piece of clothing, equipment or any other object which has accidentally fallen from the fielder’s person.
If a fielder illegally fields the ball, the ball shall immediately become dead and
the penalty for a No ball or a Wide shall stand.
any runs completed by the batsmen shall be credited to the batting side, together with the run in progress if the batsmen had already crossed at the instant of the offence.
the ball shall not count as one of the over. In addition the umpire shall:
award 5 Penalty runs to the batting side.
inform the other umpire and the captain of the fielding side of the reason for this action.
inform the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side
Protective helmets, when not in use by fielders, may not be placed on the ground, above the surface except behind the wicket-keeper and in line with both sets of stumps.
If the ball while in play strikes a helmet, placed as described in clause 28.3.1,
the ball shall become dead and, subject to clause 28.3.3,
an award of 5 Penalty runs shall be made to the batting side;
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
28.3.2.3 any runs completed by the batsmen before the ball strikes the protective helmet shall be scored,
together with the run in progress if the batsmen had already crossed at the instant of the ball striking the protective helmet.
If the ball while in play strikes a helmet, placed as described in clause 28.3.1, unless the circumstances of clause 23.3 (Leg byes not to be awarded) or clause 34 (Hit the ball twice), apply, the umpire shall:
permit the batsmen’s runs as in clause 28.3.2.3 to be scored
signal No ball or Wide ball to the scorers if applicable
award 5 Penalty runs as in clause 28.3.2.2
award any other Penalty runs due to the batting side.
If the ball while in play strikes a helmet, placed as described in clause 28.3.1, and the circumstances of clause 23.3 (Leg byes not to be awarded) or clause 34 (Hit the ball twice) apply, the umpire shall:
disallow all runs to the batting side
return any not out batsman to his original end
signal No ball or Wide ball to the scorers if applicable
award any 5-run Penalty that is applicable except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3.2.
Limitation of on side fielders
At the instant of delivery, there may not be more than 5 fielders on the leg side.
At the instant of the bowler’s delivery there shall not be more than two fielders, other than the wicket-keeper, behind the popping crease on the on side. A fielder will be considered to be behind the popping crease unless the whole of his person whether grounded or in the air is in front of this line.
In the event of infringement of this clause by any fielder, the striker’s end umpire shall call and signal No ball.
Fielders not to encroach on pitch
While the ball is in play and until the ball has made contact with the striker’s bat or person, or has passed the striker’s bat, no fielder, other than the bowler, may have any part of his person grounded on or extended over the pitch.
In the event of infringement of this clause by any fielder other than the wicket-keeper, the bowler’s end umpire shall call and signal No ball as soon as possible after delivery of the ball. Note, however, clause 27.3 (Position of wicket-keeper).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Movement by any fielder other than the wicket-keeper
Any movement by any fielder, excluding the wicket-keeper, after the ball comes into play and before the ball reaches the striker, is unfair except for the following:
minor adjustments to stance or position in relation to the striker’s wicket.
movement by any fielder, other than a close fielder, towards the striker or the striker’s wicket that does not significantly alter the position of the fielder.
movement by any fielder in response to the stroke that the striker is playing or that his actions suggest he intends to play.
In all circumstances clause 28.4 (Limitation of on side fielders) shall apply.
In the event of such unfair movement, either umpire shall call and signal Dead ball.
Note also the provisions of clause 41.4 (Deliberate attempt to distract striker). See also clause 27.4 (Movement by wicket-keeper).
Restrictions on the placement of fielders
In addition to the restrictions contained in clause 28.4 above, further fielding restrictions shall apply to certain overs in each innings. The nature of such fielding restrictions and the overs during which they shall apply are set out in the following paragraphs.
The following fielding restrictions shall apply:
Two semi-circles shall be drawn on the field of play. The semi-circles shall have as their centre the middle stump at either end of the pitch. The radius of each of the semi- circles shall be 30 yards (27.43 metres). The semi-circles shall be linked by two parallel straight lines drawn on the field. (Refer to paragraph 2 of Appendix C). The fielding restriction areas should be marked by continuous painted white lines or ‘dots’ at 5 yard (4.57 metres) intervals, each ‘dot’ to be covered by a white plastic or rubber (but not metal) disc measuring 7 inches (18 cm) in diameter.
At the instant of delivery:
Powerplay 1 – no more than two (2) fielders shall be permitted outside this fielding restriction area. In an innings of 50 overs, these are overs 1 to 10 inclusive.
Powerplay 2 – no more than four (4) fielders shall be permitted outside this fielding restriction area. In an innings of 50 overs, these are overs 11 to 40 inclusive.
Powerplay 3 – no more than five (5) fielders shall be permitted outside this fielding restriction area. In an innings of 50 overs, these are overs 41 to 50 inclusive.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
In circumstances when the number of overs of the batting team is reduced, the number of overs within each phase of the innings shall be reduced
in accordance with the table below. For the sake of clarity, it should be noted that the table shall apply to both the 1st and 2nd innings of the match.
INNINGS DURATION
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
If play is interrupted during an innings and the table above applies, the Powerplay takes immediate effect. For the avoidance of doubt this applies even if the interruption has occurred mid-over.
Illustrations:
A 50 over innings is interrupted after 8.3 overs and reduced to 32 overs. The new phases are 7+19+6. Therefore the middle phase fielding restrictions take immediate effect when play resumes and last for a further 17.3 overs. The final phase begins after 26 overs have been bowled.
A 40 over innings is interrupted after 18.5 overs and reduced to 22 overs. The new phases are 5+13+4. When play resumes, the final phase fielding restrictions apply for the remaining 3.1 overs.
At the commencement of the middle and final phases of an innings, the umpire shall signal such
commencement to the scorers by rotating his arm in a large circle.
The scoreboard shall indicate the current Powerplay in progress.
In the event of an infringement of any of the above fielding restrictions, the square leg umpire shall call and signal No ball.
THE WICKET IS DOWN
Wicket put down
The wicket is put down if a bail is completely removed from the top of the stumps, or a stump is struck out of the ground,
by the ball,
by the striker’s bat if held or by any part of the bat that he is holding,
for the purpose of this clause only, by the striker’s bat not in hand, or by any part of the bat which has become detached,
by the striker’s person or by any part of his clothing or equipment becoming detached from his person,
by a fielder with his hand or arm, providing that the ball is held in the hand or hands so used, or in the hand of the arm so used.
The wicket is also put down if a fielder strikes or pulls a stump out of the ground in the same manner.
The disturbance of a bail, whether temporary or not, shall not constitute its complete removal from the top of the stumps, but if a bail in falling lodges between two of the stumps this shall be regarded as complete removal.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
One bail off
If one bail is off, it shall be sufficient for the purpose of putting the wicket down to remove the remaining bail or to strike or pull any of the three stumps out of the ground, in any of the ways stated in clause 29.1.
Remaking wicket
If a wicket is broken or put down while the ball is in play, it shall not be remade by an umpire until the ball is dead. See clause 20 (Dead ball). Any fielder may, however, while the ball is in play,
replace a bail or bails on top of the stumps.
put back one or more stumps into the ground where the wicket originally stood.
Dispensing with bails
If the umpires have agreed to dispense with bails in accordance with clause 8.4 (Dispensing with bails), it is for the umpire concerned to decide whether or not the wicket has been put down.
After a decision to play without bails, the wicket has been put down if the umpire concerned is satisfied that the wicket has been struck by the ball, by the striker’s bat, person or items of his clothing or equipment as described in clauses 29.1.1.2, 29.1.1.3 or 29.1.1.4, or by a fielder in the manner described in clause 29.1.1.5.
If the wicket has already been broken or put down, clause
29.4.1 shall apply to any stump or stumps still in the ground. Any fielder may replace a stump or stumps, in accordance with clause 29.3, in order to have an opportunity of putting the wicket down.
BATSMAN OUT OF HIS GROUND
When out of his ground
A batsman shall be considered to be out of his ground unless some part of his person or bat is grounded behind the popping crease at that end.
However, a batsman shall not be considered to be out of his ground if, in running or diving towards his ground and beyond, and having grounded some part of his person or bat beyond the popping crease, there is subsequent loss of contact
between the ground and any part of his person or bat, or between the bat and person,
provided that the batsman has continued movement in the same direction.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Which is a batsman’s ground
If only one batsman is within a ground, it is his ground and will remain so even if he is later joined there by the other batsman.
If both batsmen are in the same ground and one of them subsequently leaves it, the ground belongs to the batsman who remains in it.
If there is no batsman in either ground, then each ground belongs to whichever batsman is nearer to it, or, if the batsmen are level, to whichever batsman was nearer to it immediately prior to their drawing level.
If a ground belongs to one batsman then the other ground belongs to the other batsman, irrespective of his position.
Position of non-striker
The non-striker, when standing at the bowler’s end, should be positioned on the opposite side of the wicket to that from which the ball is being delivered, unless a request to do otherwise is granted by the umpire.
APPEALS
Umpire not to give batsman out without an appeal
Neither umpire shall give a batsman out, even though he may be out under these Playing Conditions, unless appealed to by a fielder. This shall not debar a batsman who is out under these Playing Conditions from leaving the wicket without an appeal having been made. Note, however, the provisions of clause 31.7.
Batsman dismissed
A batsman is dismissed if he is
either given out by an umpire, on appeal
or out under these Playing Conditions and leaves the wicket as in clause 31.1.
Timing of appeals
For an appeal to be valid, it must be made before the bowler begins his run-up or, if there is no run-up, his bowling action to deliver the next ball, and before Time has been called.
The call of Over does not invalidate an appeal made prior to the start of the following over, provided Time has not been called. See clauses 12.2 (Call of Time) and 17.2 (Start of an over).
Appeal “How’s That?”
An appeal “How’s That?” covers all ways of being out.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Answering appeals
The striker’s end umpire shall answer all appeals arising out of any of clauses 35 (Hit wicket), 39 (Stumped) or 38 (Run out) when this occurs at the
wicket-keeper’s end. The bowler’s end umpire shall answer all other appeals.
When an appeal is made, each umpire shall answer on any matter that falls within his jurisdiction.
When a batsman has been given Not out, either umpire may answer an appeal, made in accordance with clause 31.3, if it is on a further matter and is within his jurisdiction.
Consultation by umpires
Each umpire shall answer appeals on matters within his/her own jurisdiction. If an umpire is doubtful about any point that the other umpire may have been in a better position to see, he/she shall consult the latter on this point of fact and shall then give the decision. If, after consultation, there is still doubt remaining, the decision shall be Not out.
Batsman leaving the wicket under a misapprehension
An umpire shall intervene if satisfied that a batsman, not having been given out, has left the wicket under a misapprehension of being out. The umpire intervening shall call and signal Dead ball to prevent any further action by the fielding side and shall recall the batsman.
A batsman may be recalled at any time up to the instant when the ball comes into play for the next delivery, unless it is the final wicket of the innings, in which case it should be up to the instant when the umpires leave the field.
Withdrawal of an appeal
The captain of the fielding side may withdraw an appeal only after obtaining the consent of the umpire within whose jurisdiction the appeal falls. If such consent is given, the umpire concerned shall, if applicable, revoke the decision and recall the batsman.
The withdrawal of an appeal must be before the instant when the ball comes into play for the next delivery or, if the innings has been completed, the instant when the umpires leave the field.
BOWLED
Out Bowled
The striker is out Bowled if his wicket is put down by a ball delivered by the bowler, not being a No ball, even if it first touches the striker’s bat or person.
However, the striker shall not be out Bowled if before striking the wicket the ball has been in contact with any other player or an umpire. The striker will, however, be subject to clauses 37 (Obstructing the field), 38 (Run out) and 39 (Stumped).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Bowled to take precedence
The striker is out Bowled if his wicket is put down as in clause 32.1, even though a decision against him for any other method of dismissal would be justified.
CAUGHT
Out Caught
The striker is out Caught if a ball delivered by the bowler, not being a No ball, touches his bat without having previously been in contact with any fielder, and is subsequently held by a fielder as a fair catch, as described in clauses 33.2 and 33.3, before it touches the ground.
A fair catch
A catch will be fair only if, in every case either the ball, at any time
or any fielder in contact with the ball,
is not grounded beyond the boundary before the catch is completed. Note clauses 19.4 (Ball grounded beyond the boundary) and 19.5 (Fielder grounded beyond the boundary).
Furthermore, a catch will be fair if any of the following conditions applies:
the ball is held in the hand or hands of a fielder, even if the hand holding the ball is touching the ground, or is hugged to the body, or lodges in the external protective equipment worn by a fielder, or lodges accidentally in a fielder’s clothing.
a fielder catches the ball after it has been lawfully struck more than once by the striker, but only if it has not been grounded since it was first struck. See clause 34 (Hit the ball twice).
a fielder catches the ball after it has touched the wicket, an umpire, another fielder or the other batsman.
a fielder catches the ball after it has crossed the boundary in the air, provided that the conditions in clause 33.2.1 are met.
the ball is caught off an obstruction within the boundary that is not designated a boundary by the umpires.
Making a catch
The act of making a catch shall start from the time when the ball first comes into contact with a fielder’s person and shall end when a fielder obtains complete control over both the ball and his own movement.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
No runs to be scored
If the striker is dismissed Caught, runs from that delivery completed by the batsmen before the completion of the catch shall not be scored but any runs for penalties awarded to either side shall stand. Clause 18.11.1 shall apply (Batsman returning to original end) from the instant of the completion of the catch.
Caught to take precedence
If the criteria of clause 33.1 are met and the striker is not out Bowled, then he is out Caught, even though a decision against either batsman for another method of dismissal would be justified.
HIT THE BALL TWICE
Out Hit the ball twice
The striker is out Hit the ball twice if, while the ball is in play, it strikes any part of his person or is struck by his bat and, before the ball has been touched by a fielder, the striker wilfully strikes it again with his bat or person, other than a hand not holding the bat, except for the sole purpose of guarding his wicket. See clause 34.3 and clause 37 (Obstructing the field).
For the purpose of this clause ‘struck’ or ‘strike’ shall include contact with the person of the striker.
Not out Hit the ball twice
The striker will not be out under this clause if he
strikes the ball a second or subsequent time in order to return the ball to any fielder.
Note, however, the provisions of clause 37.4 (Returning the ball to a fielder).
wilfully strikes the ball after it has touched a fielder. Note, however the provisions of clause 37.1 (Out Obstructing the field).
Ball lawfully struck more than once
The striker may, solely in order to guard his wicket and before the ball has been touched by a fielder, lawfully strike the ball a second or
subsequent time with the bat, or with any part of his person other than a hand not holding the bat.
However, the striker may not prevent the ball from being caught by striking the ball more than once in defence of his wicket. See clause 37.3 (Obstructing a ball from being caught).
Runs permitted from ball lawfully struck more than once
When the ball is lawfully struck more than once, as permitted in clause 34.3, if the ball does not become dead for any reason, the umpire shall call and signal Dead ball as soon as the ball reaches the boundary or at the completion of the first run. However, the umpire shall delay the call of Dead ball to allow the opportunity for a catch to be completed.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
The umpire shall
disallow all runs to the batting side
return any not out batsman to his original end
signal No ball to the scorers if applicable, and
award any 5-run Penalty that is applicable except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
Bowler does not get credit
The bowler does not get credit for the wicket.
HIT WICKET
Out Hit wicket
The striker is out Hit wicket if, after the bowler has entered the delivery stride and while the ball is in play, his wicket is put down by either the striker’s bat or person as described in clauses 29.1.1.2 to 29.1.1.4 (Wicket put down) in any of the following circumstances:
in the course of any action taken by him in preparing to receive or in receiving a delivery,
in setting off for the first run immediately after playing or playing at the ball,
if no attempt is made to play the ball, in setting off for the first run, providing that in the opinion of the umpire this is immediately after the striker has had the opportunity of playing the ball,
in lawfully making a second or further stroke for the purpose of guarding his wicket within the provisions of clause 34.3 (Ball lawfully struck more than once).
If the striker puts his wicket down in any of the ways described in clauses 29.1.1.2 to 29.1.1.4 before the bowler has entered the delivery stride, either umpire shall call and signal Dead ball.
Not out Hit wicket
The striker is not out under this clause should his wicket be put down in any of the ways referred to in clause 35.1 if any of the following applies:
it occurs after the striker has completed any action in receiving the delivery, other than in clauses 35.1.1.2 to 35.1.1.4.
it occurs when the striker is in the act of running, other than setting off immediately for the first run.
it occurs when the striker is trying to avoid being run out or stumped.
it occurs when the striker is trying to avoid a throw in at any time.
the bowler after entering the delivery stride does not deliver the ball. In this case either umpire shall immediately call and signal Dead ball. See clause 20.4 (Umpire calling and signalling Dead ball).
the delivery is a No ball.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
LEG BEFORE WICKET
Out LBW
The striker is out LBW if all the circumstances set out in clauses 36.1.1 to
36.1.5 apply.
The bowler delivers a ball, not being a No ball
the ball, if it is not intercepted full-pitch, pitches in line between wicket and wicket or on the off side of the striker’s wicket
the ball not having previously touched his bat, the striker intercepts the ball, either full-pitch or after pitching, with any part of his person
the point of impact, even if above the level of the bails, either is between wicket and wicket
or if the striker has made no genuine attempt to play the ball with the bat, is
between wicket and wicket or outside the line of the off stump.
but for the interception, the ball would have hit the wicket.
Interception of the ball
In assessing points of impact in clauses 36.1.3, 36.1.4 and 36.1.5, only the first interception is to be considered.
In assessing clause 36.1.3, if the bowler’s end umpire is not satisfied that the ball intercepted the batsman’s person before it touched the bat, the batsman shall be given Not out.
In assessing clause 36.1.5, it is to be assumed that the path of the ball before interception would have continued after interception, irrespective of whether the ball might have pitched subsequently or not.
Off side of wicket
The off side of the striker’s wicket shall be determined by the striker’s stance at the moment the ball comes into play for that delivery. See paragraph 13 of Appendix A.
OBSTRUCTING THE FIELD
Out Obstructing the field
Either batsman is out Obstructing the field if, except in the circumstances of clause 37.2, and while the ball is in play, he wilfully attempts to obstruct or distract the fielding side by word or action. See also clause 34 (Hit the ball twice).
The striker is out Obstructing the field if, except in the circumstances of clause 37.2, in the act of receiving a ball delivered by the bowler, he wilfully strikes the ball with a hand not holding the bat. This will apply whether it is the first strike or a second or subsequent strike. The act of receiving the ball shall extend both to playing at the ball and to striking the ball more than once in defence of his wicket.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
This clause will apply whether or not No ball is called.
For the avoidance of doubt, if an umpire feels that a batsman, in running between the wickets, has significantly changed
his direction without probable cause and thereby obstructed a fielder’s attempt to effect a run out, the batsman should, on appeal, be given out, obstructing the field. It shall not be relevant whether a run out would have occurred or not.
If the change of direction involves the batsman crossing the pitch, clause 41.14 shall also apply.
See also paragraph 2.2 of Appendix D.
Not out Obstructing the field
A batsman shall not be out Obstructing the field if obstruction or distraction is accidental, or obstruction is in order to avoid injury, or
in the case of the striker, he makes a second or subsequent strike to guard his wicket lawfully as in clause 34.3 (Ball lawfully struck more than once). However, see clause 37.3.
Obstructing a ball from being caught
The striker is out Obstructing the field should wilful obstruction or distraction by either batsman prevent a catch being completed. This shall apply even though the obstruction is caused by the striker in lawfully guarding his wicket under the provision of clause 34.3 (Ball lawfully struck more than once).
Returning the ball to a fielder
Either batsman is out Obstructing the field if, at any time while the ball is in play and, without the consent of a fielder, he uses the bat or any part of his person to return the ball to any fielder.
Runs scored
When either batsman is dismissed Obstructing the field,
unless the obstruction prevents a catch from being made, any runs completed by the batsmen before the offence shall be scored, together with any runs awarded for penalties to either side. See clauses 18.6 (Runs awarded for penalties) and 18.8 (Runs scored when a batsman is dismissed).
if the obstruction prevents a catch from being made, any runs completed by the batsmen shall not be scored but any penalties awarded to either side shall stand.
Bowler does not get credit
The bowler does not get credit for the wicket.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
RUN OUT
Out Run out
Either batsman is out Run out, except as in clause 38.2, if, at any time while the ball is in play,
he is out of his ground
and his wicket is fairly put down by the action of a fielder
even though No ball has been called, except in the circumstances of clause 38.2.2.2, and whether or not a run is being attempted.
Batsman not out Run out
A batsman is not out Run out in the circumstances of clauses 38.2.1.1 or 38.2.1.2.
He has been within his ground and has subsequently left it to avoid injury, when the wicket is put down.
Note also the provisions of clause 30.1.2 (When out of his ground).
The ball delivered by the bowler has not made contact with a fielder, before the wicket is put down.
The striker is not out Run out in any of the circumstances in clauses 38.2.2.1 and 38.2.2.2.
He is out Stumped. See clause 39.1.2 (Out Stumped).
No ball has been called
and he is out of his ground not attempting a run
and the wicket is fairly put down by the wicket- keeper without the intervention of another fielder.
Which batsman is out
The batsman out in the circumstances of clause 38.1 is the one whose ground is at the end where the wicket is put down. See clause 30.2 (Which is a batsman’s ground).
Runs scored
If either batsman is dismissed Run out, the run in progress when the wicket is put down shall not be scored, but any runs completed by the batsmen shall stand, together with any runs for penalties awarded to either side. See clauses 18.6 (Runs awarded for penalties) and 18.8 (Runs scored when a batsman is dismissed).
Bowler does not get credit
The bowler does not get credit for the wicket.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
STUMPED
Out Stumped
The striker is out Stumped, except as in clause 39.3, if a ball which is delivered is not called No ball
and he is out of his ground, other than as in clause 39.3.1 and he has not attempted a run
when his wicket is fairly put down by the wicket-keeper without the intervention of another fielder. Note, however clause 27.3 (Position of wicket-keeper).
The striker is out Stumped if all the conditions of clause 39.1.1 are satisfied, even though a decision of Run out would be justified.
Ball rebounding from wicket-keeper’s person
If the wicket is put down by the ball, it shall be regarded as having been put down by the wicket-keeper if the ball rebounds on to the stumps from any part of the wicket-keeper’s person or equipment or has been kicked or thrown on to the stumps by the wicket-keeper.
Not out Stumped
The striker will not be out Stumped if he has left his ground in order to avoid injury.
If the striker is not out Stumped he may, except in the circumstances of 38.2.2.2 (Batsman not out run out) be out Run out if the conditions of clause 38.1 (Out Run out) apply.
TIMED OUT
Out Timed out
After the fall of a wicket or the retirement of a batsman, the incoming batsman must, unless Time has been called, be in position to take guard or for the other batsman to be ready to receive the next ball within 3 minutes of the dismissal or
retirement. If this requirement is not met, the incoming batsman will be out, Timed out.
In the event of an extended delay in which no batsman comes to the wicket, the umpires shall adopt the procedure of clause
16.2 (ICC Match Referee awarding a match). For the purposes of that clause the start of the action shall be taken as the expiry of the 3 minutes referred to above.
Bowler does not get credit
The bowler does not get credit for the wicket.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
UNFAIR PLAY
Fair and unfair play – responsibility of captains
The captains are responsible for ensuring that play is conducted within the Spirit of Cricket, as well as within these Playing Conditions.
Fair and unfair play – responsibility of umpires
The umpires shall be the sole judges of fair and unfair play. If either umpire considers an action, not covered by these Playing Conditions, to be unfair he/she shall intervene without appeal and, if the ball is in play, call and signal Dead ball and implement the procedure as set out in clause 41.19. Otherwise umpires shall not interfere with the progress of play without appeal except as required to do so by these Playing Conditions.
The match ball – changing its condition
The umpires shall make frequent and irregular inspections of the ball. In addition, they shall immediately inspect the ball if they suspect anyone of attempting to change the condition of the ball, except as permitted in clause 41.3.2.
It is an offence for any player to take any action which changes the condition of the ball.
Except in carrying out his normal duties, a batsman is not allowed to wilfully damage the ball other than, when the ball is in play, in striking it with the bat. See also clause 5.5 (Damage to the ball).
A fielder may, however:
polish the ball on his clothing provided that no artificial substance is used and that such polishing wastes no time.
remove mud from the ball under the supervision of an umpire.
dry a wet ball on a piece of cloth that has been approved by the umpires.
The umpires shall consider the condition of the ball to have been unfairly changed if any action by any player does not comply with the conditions in clause 41.3.2.
If the umpires together agree that the condition of the ball has been unfairly changed by a member or members of either side, or that its condition is inconsistent with the use it has received, they shall consider that there has been a contravention of
this clause and decide together whether they can identify the player(s) responsible for such conduct.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
If it is possible to identify the player(s) responsible for changing the condition of the ball, the umpires shall;
Change the ball forthwith.
If the umpires together agree that the condition of the ball has been unfairly changed by a member or members of the fielding side, the batsman at the wicket shall choose the replacement ball from
a selection of six other balls of various degrees of usage (including a new ball) and of the same brand as the ball in use prior to the contravention.
If the umpires together agree that the condition of the ball has been unfairly changed by a member or members of the batting side, the umpires shall select and bring into use immediately, a ball which shall have wear comparable to that of the previous ball immediately prior to the contravention.
Additionally, the bowler’s end umpire shall
award 5 Penalty runs to the opposing side.
if appropriate, inform the batsmen at the wicket and the captain of the fielding side that the ball has been changed and the reason for their action.
inform the captain of the batting side as soon as practicable of what has occurred.
The umpires shall then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is
considered appropriate against the player(s) concerned.
If it is not possible to identify the player(s) responsible for changing the condition of the ball, the umpires shall;
Change the ball forthwith. The umpires shall choose the replacement ball for one of similar wear and
of the same brand as the ball in use prior to the contravention.
The bowler’s end umpire shall issue the captain with a first and final warning, and
Advise the captain that should there be any further instances of changing the condition of the ball by that team during the remainder of the series, clause 41.3.5.2 above will be adopted, with the captain deemed to be the player responsible for the contravention.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Deliberate attempt to distract striker
It is unfair for any fielder deliberately to attempt to distract the striker while he is preparing to receive or receiving a delivery.
If either umpire considers that any action by a fielder is such an attempt, he/she shall immediately call and signal Dead ball and inform the other umpire of the reason for the call. The bowler’s end umpire shall:
award 5 Penalty runs to the batting side.
inform the captain of the fielding side, the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of the reason for the action.
Neither batsman shall be dismissed from that delivery and the ball shall not count as one of the over.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the fielder concerned.
Deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman
In addition to clause 41.4, it is unfair for any fielder wilfully to attempt, by word or action, to distract, deceive or obstruct either batsman after the striker has received the ball.
It is for either one of the umpires to decide whether any distraction, deception or obstruction is wilful or not.
If either umpire considers that a fielder has caused or attempted to cause such a distraction, deception or obstruction, he/she shall immediately call and signal Dead ball and inform the other umpire of the reason for the call.
Neither batsman shall be dismissed from that delivery.
If an obstruction involves physical contact, the umpires together shall decide whether or not an offence under clause 42 (Players’ conduct) has been committed.
If an offence under clause 42 (Players’ conduct) has been committed, they shall apply the relevant
procedures in clause 42 and shall also apply each of clauses 41.5.7 to 41.5.9.
If they consider that there has been no offence under clause 42 (Players’ conduct), they shall apply each of clauses 41.5.6 to 41.5.10.
The bowler’s end umpire shall;
award 5 Penalty runs to the batting side.
inform the captain of the fielding side of the reason for this action and as soon as practicable inform the captain of the batting side.
The ball shall not count as one of the over.
Any runs completed by the batsmen before the offence shall be scored, together with any runs for penalties awarded to either side. Additionally, the run in progress shall be scored whether or not the batsmen had already crossed at the instant of the offence.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
The batsmen at the wicket shall decide which of them is to face the next delivery.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the fielder concerned.
Bowling of dangerous and unfair short pitched deliveries
Notwithstanding clause 41.6.2, the bowling of short pitched deliveries is dangerous if the bowler’s end umpire considers that, taking into consideration the skill of the striker, by their speed, length, height and direction they are likely to inflict physical injury on him. The fact that the striker is wearing protective equipment shall be disregarded.
In the first instance the umpire decides that the bowling of short pitched deliveries has become dangerous under clause 41.6.1
The umpire shall call and signal No ball, and when the ball is dead, caution the bowler and inform the other umpire, the captain of the fielding side and the batsmen of what has occurred. This caution shall apply to that bowler throughout the innings.
If there is a second instance, the umpire shall repeat the above procedure and indicate to the bowler that this is a final warning, which shall apply to that bowler throughout the innings.
Should there be any further instance by the same bowler in that innings, the umpire shall:
call and signal No ball
when the ball is dead, direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling
inform the other umpire for the reason for this action.
The bowler thus suspended shall not be allowed to bowl again in that innings.
If applicable, the over shall be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled any part of the previous over, nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over.
The umpire shall report the occurrence to the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, to the captain of the batting side.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is
considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
A bowler shall be limited to two fast short-pitched deliveries per over.
A fast short-pitched delivery is defined as a ball, which passes or would have passed above the shoulder height of the striker standing upright at the popping crease.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The umpire at the bowler’s end shall advise the bowler and the batsman on strike when each fast short pitched delivery has been bowled.
In addition, a ball that passes above head height of the batsman, standing upright at the popping crease, that prevents him from being able to hit it with his bat by means of a normal cricket stroke shall be called a Wide. See also clause 22.1.1.2
For the avoidance of doubt any fast short pitched delivery that is called a Wide under this clause shall also count as one of the allowable short pitched deliveries in that over.
In the event of a bowler bowling more than two fast short-pitched deliveries in an over as defined in clause
above, the umpire at the bowler’s end shall call and signal No ball on each occasion. A differential signal shall be used to signify a fast short pitched delivery. The umpire shall call and signal ‘No ball’ and then tap the head with the other hand.
If a bowler delivers a third fast short pitched ball in an over, the umpire, after the call of No ball and when the ball is dead, shall caution the bowler, inform the other umpire, the captain of the fielding side and the batsmen at the wicket of what has occurred. This caution shall apply throughout the innings.
If there is a second instance of the bowler being No balled in the innings for bowling more than two fast short pitched deliveries in an over, the umpire shall advise the bowler that this is his final warning for the innings.
Should there be any further instance by the same bowler in that innings, the umpire shall
call and signal No ball
when the ball is dead, direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling
inform the other umpire for the reason for this action.
The bowler thus suspended shall not be allowed to bowl again in that innings.
If applicable, the over shall be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled any part of the previous over, nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over.
The umpire shall report the occurrence to the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, to the captain of the batting side.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is
considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Should the umpires initiate the caution and warning procedures set out in clauses 41.6.1.3 and 41.7 such cautions and warnings are not to be cumulative.
Bowling of dangerous and unfair non-pitching deliveries
Any delivery, which passes or would have passed, without pitching, above waist height of the striker standing upright at the popping crease, is to be deemed to be unfair, whether or not it is likely to inflict physical injury on the striker. If the
bowler bowls such a delivery the umpire shall immediately call and signal No ball.
If, in the opinion of the umpire, such a delivery is considered likely to inflict physical injury on the batsman by its speed and direction, it shall be considered dangerous. When the ball is dead the umpire shall caution the bowler, indicating that this is a first and final warning. The umpire shall also inform the other umpire, the captain of the fielding side and the batsmen of what has occurred. This caution shall apply to that bowler throughout the innings.
Should there be any further instance (where a dangerous
non-pitching delivery is bowled and is considered likely to inflict physical injury on the batsman) by the same bowler in that innings, the umpire shall:
call and signal No ball
when the ball is dead, direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling
inform the other umpire for the reason for this action.
The bowler thus suspended shall not be allowed to bowl again in that innings.
If applicable, the over shall be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled any part of the previous over, nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over.
Additionally the umpire shall:
report the occurrence to the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, to the captain of the batting side.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
The warning sequence in clauses 41.7.1 and 41.7.2 is independent of the warning and action sequence in clause 41.6.
If the umpire considers that a bowler deliberately bowled a high full-pitched delivery, deemed to be dangerous and unfair as defined in clause 41.7.1, then the caution and warning in clause
41.7.1 shall be dispensed with. The umpire shall:
immediately call and signal No ball.
when the ball is dead, direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling and inform the other umpire for the reason for this action.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The bowler thus suspended shall not be allowed to bowl again in that innings.
If applicable, the over shall be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled any part of the previous over, nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over.
report the occurrence to the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, to the captain of the batting side.
The umpires together shall report the occurrence to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
Bowling of deliberate front-foot No ball
If the umpire considers that the bowler has delivered a deliberate front-foot No ball, he/she shall:
immediately call and signal No ball.
when the ball is dead, direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling.
inform the other umpire for the reason for this action.
The bowler thus suspended shall not be allowed to bowl again in that innings.
If applicable, the over shall be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled any part of the previous over, nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over.
report the occurrence to the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, to the captain of the batting side.
The umpires together shall report the occurrence to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
Time wasting by the fielding side
It is unfair for any fielder to waste time.
If either umpire considers that the progress of an over is unnecessarily slow, or time is being wasted in any other way, by the captain of the fielding side or by any other fielder, at the first instance the umpire concerned shall:
if the ball is in play, call and signal Dead ball.
inform the other umpire of what has occurred. The bowler’s end umpire shall then:
warn the captain of the fielding side, indicating that this is a first and final warning.
inform the batsmen of what has occurred.
If either umpire considers that there is any further waste of time in that innings by any fielder, the umpire concerned shall:
if the ball is in play, call and signal Dead ball.
inform the other umpire of what has occurred.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
The bowler’s end umpire shall then award 5 Penalty runs to the batting side and inform the captain of the fielding side of the reason for this action.
Additionally the umpire shall inform the batsmen and, as soon as is practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
If the umpires believe that the act of time wasting was deliberate or repetitive, they may lodge a report under the ICC Code of Conduct. In such circumstances the Captain and/or any individual members of the fielding team responsible for the time wasting will be charged.
Batsman wasting time
It is unfair for a batsman to waste time. In normal circumstances, the striker should always be ready to take strike when the bowler is ready to start his run-up.
In addition, an incoming batsman should be in position to take guard or his partner ready to receive the next ball within
2 minutes of the fall of the previous wicket.
Should either batsman waste time by failing to meet this requirement, or in any other way, the following procedure shall be adopted. At the first instance, either before the bowler starts his run-up or when the ball becomes dead, as appropriate, the umpire shall:
warn both batsmen and indicate that this is a first and final warning. This warning shall apply throughout the innings. The umpire shall so inform each incoming batsman.
inform the other umpire of what has occurred.
inform the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
If there is any further time wasting by any batsman in that innings, the umpire shall, at the appropriate time while the ball is dead:
award 5 Penalty runs to the fielding side.
inform the other umpire of the reason for this action.
inform the other batsman, the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
If the umpires believe that the act of time wasting was deemed to be deliberate or repetitive, they may lodge a report under the ICC Code of Conduct. In such circumstances the batsman concerned will be charged.
The protected area
The protected area is defined as that area of the pitch contained within a rectangle bounded at each end by imaginary lines parallel to the popping creases and 5 ft/1.52 m in front of each, and on the sides by imaginary lines, one each side of the imaginary line joining the centres of the two middle stumps, each parallel to it and 1 ft/30.48 cm from it.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Fielder damaging the pitch
It is unfair to cause deliberate or avoidable damage to the pitch. A fielder will be deemed to be causing avoidable damage if either umpire considers that his presence on the pitch is without reasonable cause.
If a fielder causes avoidable damage to the pitch, other than as in clause 41.13.1, at the first instance the umpire seeing the contravention shall, when the ball is dead, inform the other umpire. The bowler’s end umpire shall then:
caution the captain of the fielding side and indicate that this is a first and final warning. This warning shall apply throughout the innings.
inform the batsmen of what has occurred.
If, in that innings, there is any further instance of avoidable damage to the pitch, by any fielder, the umpire seeing the contravention shall, when the ball is dead, inform the other umpire. The bowler’s end umpire shall then:
award 5 Penalty runs to the batting side. Additionally the umpire shall
inform the fielding captain of the reason for this action.
inform the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
The umpires together shall report the occurrence to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the fielder concerned.
Bowler running on protected area
It is unfair for a bowler to enter the protected area in his follow-through without reasonable cause, whether or not the ball is delivered.
If a bowler contravenes this clause, at the first instance and when the ball is dead, the umpire shall:
caution the bowler and inform the other umpire of what has occurred. This caution shall apply to that bowler throughout the innings.
inform the captain of the fielding side and the batsmen of what has occurred.
If, in that innings, the same bowler again contravenes this clause, the umpire shall repeat the above procedure indicating that this is a final warning. This warning shall also apply throughout the innings.
If, in that innings, the same bowler contravenes this clause a third time, when the ball is dead, the umpire shall,
direct the captain of the fielding side to suspend the bowler immediately from bowling. If applicable, the over shall be completed by another bowler, who shall neither have bowled
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
any part of the previous over, nor be allowed to bowl any part of the next over. The bowler taken off shall not be allowed to bowl again in that innings.
inform the other umpire of the reason for this action.
inform the batsmen and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the bowler concerned.
Batsman damaging the pitch
It is unfair to cause deliberate or avoidable damage to the pitch.
If the striker enters the protected area in playing or playing at the ball, he must move from it immediately thereafter. A batsman will be deemed to be causing avoidable damage if either umpire considers that his presence on the pitch is without reasonable cause.
If either batsman causes deliberate or avoidable damage to the pitch, other than as in clause 41.15, at the first instance the umpire seeing the contravention shall, when the ball is dead, inform the other umpire of the occurrence. The bowler’s end umpire shall then:
warn both batsmen that the practice is unfair and indicate that this is a first and final warning. This warning shall apply throughout the innings. The umpire shall so inform each incoming batsman.
inform the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
If there is any further instance of avoidable damage to the pitch by any batsman in that innings, the umpire seeing the contravention shall, when the ball is dead, inform the other umpire of the occurrence.
The bowler’s end umpire shall:
disallow all runs to the batting side.
return any not out batsman to his original end.
signal No ball or Wide to the scorers if applicable.
award 5 Penalty runs to the fielding side.
award any other 5-run Penalty that is applicable except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
Inform the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of the reason for this action.
The umpires together shall report the occurrence to the
ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the batsman concerned.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Striker in protected area
The striker shall not adopt a stance in the protected area or so close to it that frequent encroachment is inevitable.
The striker may mark a guard on the pitch provided that no mark is unreasonably close to the protected area.
If either umpire considers that the striker is in breach of any of the conditions in clause 41.15.1, if the bowler has not entered the delivery stride, he/she shall immediately call Dead ball, otherwise, wait until the ball is dead; he/she shall then inform the other umpire of the occurrence.
The bowler’s end umpire shall then:
warn the striker that the practice is unfair and indicate that this is a first and final warning. This warning shall apply throughout the innings. The umpire shall so inform the
non-striker and each incoming batsman.
inform the captain of the fielding side and, as soon
as practicable, the captain of the batting side of what has occurred.
If there is any further breach of any of the conditions in clause
41.15.1 by any batsman in that innings, the umpire seeing the contravention shall, if the bowler has not entered his delivery stride, immediately call and signal Dead ball, otherwise, he/she shall wait until the ball is dead and then inform the other umpire of the occurrence.
The bowler’s end umpire shall:
disallow all runs to the batting side.
return any not out batsman to his original end.
signal No ball or Wide to the scorers if applicable.
award 5 Penalty runs to the fielding side.
award any other 5-run Penalty that is applicable except for Penalty runs under clause 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side).
inform the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side of the reason for this action.
The umpires together shall report the occurrence to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the batsman concerned.
Non-striker leaving his ground early
If the non-striker is out of his ground from the moment the ball comes into play to the instant when the bowler would normally have been expected to release the ball, the bowler is permitted to attempt to run him out. Whether the attempt is successful or not, the ball shall not count as one in the over.
If the bowler fails in an attempt to run out the non-striker, the umpire shall call and signal Dead ball as soon as possible.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Batsmen stealing a run
It is unfair for the batsmen to attempt to steal a run during the bowler’s run-up.
Unless the bowler attempts to run out either batsman – see clauses 41.16 and 21.4 (Bowler throwing towards striker’s end before delivery) – the umpire shall:
call and signal Dead ball as soon as the batsmen cross in such an attempt.
inform the other umpire of the reason for this action. The bowler’s end umpire shall then:
return the batsmen to their original ends.
award 5 Penalty runs to the fielding side.
inform the batsmen, the captain of the fielding side and, as soon as practicable, the captain of the batting side, of the reason for this action.
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the batsman concerned.
Penalty runs
When Penalty runs are awarded to either side, when the ball is dead the umpire shall signal the Penalty runs to the scorers. See clause 2.13 (Signals).
Penalty runs shall be awarded in each case where these Playing Conditions require the award, even if a result has already been achieved. See clause 16.6 (Winning hit or extras).
Note, however, that the restrictions on awarding Penalty runs, in clauses 23.3 (Leg byes not to be awarded), 34.4 (Runs scored from ball lawfully struck more than once) and 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side), will apply.
When 5 Penalty runs are awarded to the batting side under any of clauses 24.4 (Player returning without permission), 28.2 (Fielding the ball), 28.3 (Protective helmets belonging to the fielding side) or under 41.3, 41.4, 41.5, 41.9 or 41.12, then:
they shall be scored as Penalty extras and shall be in addition to any other penalties.
they are awarded when the ball is dead and shall not be regarded as runs scored from either the immediately
preceding delivery or the immediately following delivery, and shall be in addition to any runs from those deliveries.
the batsmen shall not change ends solely by reason of the 5 run penalty.
When 5 Penalty runs are awarded to the fielding side, under clause 18.5.2 (Deliberate short runs), or under 41.10, 41.14, 41.15 or 41.17, they shall be added as Penalty extras to that side’s total of runs in its most recently completed innings. If the fielding side has not completed an innings, the 5 Penalty runs shall be added to the score in its next innings.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Unfair actions
If an umpire considers that any action by a player, not covered in these Playing Conditions, is unfair, he/she shall call and signal Dead ball, if appropriate, as soon as it becomes clear that the call will not disadvantage the non-offending side, and report the matter to the other umpire.
The bowler’s end umpire shall:
If this is a first offence by that side
summon the offending player’s captain and issue a first and final warning which shall apply to all
members of the team for the remainder of the match.
warn the offending player’s captain that any further such offence by any member of his team shall result in the award of 5 Penalty runs to the opposing team.
If this is a second or subsequent offence by that side:
award 5 Penalty runs to the opposing side
The umpires may then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee who shall take such action as is considered appropriate against the player concerned.
PLAYERS’ CONDUCT
Serious misconduct
The umpires shall act upon any serious misconduct. The relevant offences and the corresponding actions by the umpires are identified in clause 42.2.1. These offences correspond with
Level 4 offences in the ICC Code of Conduct. Level 1 to Level 3 offences continue to be dealt with separately under the ICC Code of Conduct.
If either umpire considers that a player has committed one of these offences at any time during the match, the umpire concerned shall call and signal Dead ball. This call may be
delayed until the umpire is satisfied that it will not disadvantage the non-offending side.
The umpire concerned shall report the matter to the other umpire and together they shall decide whether an offence has been committed. The umpires may also consult with the third umpire and the match referee, who may review any audio or video replays to confirm whether an offence has been committed. If so, the umpires shall then apply the related sanctions.
If the offence is committed by a batsman, the umpires shall summon the offending player’s captain to the field. Solely for the purpose of this clause, the batsmen at the wicket may not deputise for their captain.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Level 4 offences and action by umpires
Any of the following actions by a player shall constitute a Level 4 offence:
threatening to assault an umpire
making inappropriate and deliberate physical contact with an umpire
physically assaulting a player or any other person
committing any other act of violence.
If such an offence is committed, 42.2.2.1 to 42.2.2.5 shall be implemented.
The umpire shall call Time.
Together the umpires shall summon and inform the offending player’s captain that an offence at this Level has occurred.
The umpires shall instruct the captain to remove the offending player immediately from the field of play for the remainder of the match and shall apply the following:
If the offending player is a fielder, no substitute shall be allowed for him. He is to be recorded as Retired – out at the
commencement of any subsequent innings in which his team is the batting side.
If a bowler is suspended mid-over, then that over must be completed by a different bowler, who shall not have bowled the previous over nor shall be permitted to bowl the next over.
If the offending player is a batsman he is to be recorded as Retired – out in the current innings, unless he has been dismissed under any of clauses 32 to 39, and at the commencement of any subsequent innings in which his team is the batting side. If no further batsman is available to bat, the innings is completed.
As soon as practicable, the umpire shall:
award 5 Penalty runs to the opposing team
signal the Level 4 penalty to the scorers
call Play.
The umpires shall then report the matter to the ICC Match Referee under the ICC Code of Conduct.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Captain refusing to remove a player from the field
If a captain refuses to carry out an instruction under 42.2.2.3, the umpires shall invoke clause 16.2 (ICC Match Referee awarding a match).
If both captains refuse to carry out instructions under 42.2.2.3 in respect of the same incident, the umpires shall instruct the players to leave the field. The match is not concluded as in clause 12.6 and there shall be no result under clause 16.
Additional points relating to Level 4 offences
If a player, while acting as wicket-keeper, commits a Level 4 offence, clause 24.1.2 shall not apply, meaning that only a nominated player may keep wicket, even if another fielder becomes injured or ill and is replaced by a substitute.
A nominated player who has a substitute will also suffer the penalty for any Level 4 offence committed by the substitute. However, only the substitute will be reported under clause 42.2.2.5.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDICES TO ICC
ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL MATCH PLAYING CONDITIONS
(INCORPORATING THE 2017 CODE OF THE MCC LAWS OF CRICKET) EFFECTIVE 1 OCTOBER 2017
Definitions
Equipment
The bat
The wickets
Wicket-keeping gloves
The venue
The pitch and the creases
Advertising on grounds, perimeter boards and sight-screens
Markings on outfield
Decision Review System (DRS) and Third Umpire Protocol
Calculations
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX A
DEFINITIONS
THE MATCH
The game is used in these Playing Conditions as a general term meaning the Game of Cricket.
A match is a single One Day International between two teams, played under these Playing Conditions.
ODI is an abbreviation for One Day International.
The toss is the toss for choice of innings.
Before the toss is at any time before the toss on the day the match is expected to start.
Before the match is at any time before the toss, not restricted to the day of the match.
During the match is at any time after the toss until the conclusion of the match, whether play is in progress or not.
Playing time is any time between the call of Play and the call of Time. See clauses 12.1 (Call of Play) and 12.2 (Call of Time).
Conduct of the match includes any action relevant to the match at any time.
Ground Authority is the entity responsible for the selection and preparation of the pitch and other functions relating to the hosting and management of the match, including any agents acting on their behalf (including but not limited to the curator or other ground staff).
Home Board is the ICC member responsible for the home team and the hosting of the match.
Visiting Board is the ICC member responsible for the visiting team.
A Reserve Day is, where scheduled, an additional day for the completion of the match.
The Spirit of Cricket refers to the values of respect and fair play that underpin the game of cricket, as set out in the Preamble to these Playing Conditions.
The ICC Code of Conduct is the ICC Code of Conduct for Players and Player Support Personnel, as amended from time to time.
IMPLEMENTS AND EQUIPMENT
Implements used in the match are the bat, the ball, the stumps and bails.
External protective equipment is any visible item of apparel worn for protection against external blows.
For a batsman, items permitted are a protective helmet, external leg guards (batting pads), batting gloves and, if visible, forearm guards.
For a fielder, only a protective helmet is permitted, except in the case of a wicket-keeper, for whom wicket-keeping pads and gloves are
also permitted.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
A protective helmet is headwear made of hard material and designed to protect the head or the face or both, which shall (in line with the Clothing and Equipment Regulations) be certified to BS7928:2013.
For the purposes of interpreting these Playing Conditions, such a description will include faceguards.
Equipment – a batsman’s equipment is his bat as defined above, together with any external protective equipment he is wearing.
A fielder’s equipment is any external protective equipment that he is wearing.
The bat – the following are to be considered as part of the bat:
the whole of the bat itself.
the whole of a glove (or gloves) worn on the hand (or hands) holding the bat.
the hand (or hands) holding the bat, if the batsman is not wearing a glove on that hand or on those hands.
Held in batsman’s hand. Contact between a batsman’s hand, or glove worn on his hand, and any part of the bat shall constitute the bat being held in that hand.
THE PLAYING AREA
The field of play is the area contained within the boundary.
The square is a specially prepared area of the field of play within which the match pitch is situated.
The outfield is that part of the field of play between the square and the boundary.
POSITIONING
Behind the popping crease at one end of the pitch is that area of the field of play, including any other marking, objects and persons therein, that is on that side of the popping crease that does not include the creases at the
opposite end of the pitch. Behind, in relation to any other marking, object or person, follows the same principle. See the diagram in paragraph 13.
In front of the popping crease at one end of the pitch is that area of the field of play, including any other marking, objects and persons therein, that is on that side of the popping crease that includes the creases
at the opposite end of the pitch. In front of, in relation to any other marking, object or person, follows the same principle. See the diagram in paragraph 13.
The striker’s end is the place where the striker stands to receive a delivery from the bowler only insofar as it identifies, independently of where the striker may subsequently move, one end of the pitch.
The bowler’s end is the end from which the bowler delivers the ball. It is the other end of the pitch from the striker’s end and identifies that end of the pitch that is not the striker’s end as described in paragraph 4.3.
The wicket-keeper’s end is the same as the striker’s end as described in paragraph 4.3.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
In front of the line of the striker’s wicket is in the area of the field of play in front of the imaginary line joining the fronts of the stumps at the striker’s end; this line to be considered extended in both directions to the boundary. See paragraph 4.2.
Behind the wicket is in the area of the field of play behind the imaginary line joining the backs of the stumps at the appropriate end; this line
to be considered extended in both directions to the boundary. See paragraph 4.1.
Behind the wicket-keeper is behind the wicket at the striker’s end,
as defined above, but in line with both sets of stumps and further from the stumps than the wicket-keeper.
Off side/on (leg) side – see diagram in paragraph 13.
Inside edge is the edge on the same side as the nearer wicket.
UMPIRES AND DECISION-MAKING
Umpire – where the description the umpire is used on its own, it always means ‘the bowler’s end umpire’ though this full description is sometimes used for emphasis or clarity. Similarly the umpires always means both umpires and the third umpire. An umpire and umpires are generalised terms. Otherwise, a fuller description indicates which one of the umpires is specifically intended. Each umpire will be bowler’s end umpire and striker’s end umpire in alternate overs.
Bowler’s end umpire is the umpire who is standing at the bowler’s end (see paragraph 4.4) for the current delivery.
Striker’s end umpire is the umpire who is standing at the striker’s end (see paragraph 4.3), to one side of the pitch or the other, depending on his/her choice, for the current delivery.
On-field umpires shall mean, collectively, the bowler’s end umpire and the striker’s end umpire.
Third umpire is the umpire who may use television evidence and other available technology in order review a decision of the on-field umpires, either by way of an Umpire Review or a Player Review under the protocol set out in Appendix D.
Umpires together agree applies to decisions which the umpires are to make jointly, independently of the players.
Decision Review System or DRS is the process covered by the Decision Review System and Third Umpire Protocol set out in Appendix D, under which the third umpire may be consulted in relation to a decision of the on-field umpires, either by way of an Umpire Review or a Player Review.
Player Review is the process set out in Appendix D by which a player may request a review of any decision taken by the on-field umpires concerning whether or not a batsman is dismissed (with the exception of ‘Timed out’).
Umpire Review is the process set out in Appendix D by which an
on-field umpire has the discretion to refer a decision to the third umpire or, under certain circumstances, to consult with the third umpire before making a decision.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Soft Signal is the visual communication by the bowler’s end umpire to the third umpire (accompanied by additional information via two-way radio where necessary) of his/her initial on-field decision prior to initiating an Umpire Review.
Umpire’s Call is the concept within the DRS under which the on-field decision of the bowler’s end umpire shall stand, which shall apply under the specific circumstances set out in paragraphs 3.4.5 and 3.4.6 of Appendix D, where the ball-tracking technology indicates a marginal decision in respect of either the Impact Zone or the Wicket Zone.
The Pitching Zone as used in the DRS is a two dimensional area on the pitch between both sets of stumps with its boundaries consisting of the base of both sets of stumps and a line between the outside of the outer stumps at each end.
The Impact Zone as used in the DRS is a three dimensional space extending between both sets of stumps to an indefinite height vertically and with its boundaries consisting of the base of the stumps and the outside of the outer stumps at each end.
The Wicket Zone as used in the DRS is a two dimensional area with its boundaries consisting of the outside of the outer stumps, the base of the stumps, and the lower edge of the bails.
A Fair Catch is a catch that has been taken cleanly by the fielder in accordance with clause 33.
A Bump Ball is where the ball has made contact with the ground shortly after making contact with the striker’s bat.
The Elite Panel is the group of umpires contracted to the ICC to officiate in international cricket.
The International Panel is the group of umpires nominated by the ICC’s full members in accordance with clause 2.1.3 of the Playing Conditions.
BATSMEN
Batting side is the side currently batting, whether or not play is in progress.
Member of the batting side is one of the players nominated by the captain of the batting side, or any authorised replacement for such nominated player.
A batsman’s ground – at each end of the pitch, the whole area of the field of play behind the popping crease is the ground at that end for a batsman.
Original end is the end where a batsman was when the ball came into play for that delivery.
Wicket he has left is the wicket at the end where a batsman was at the start of the run in progress.
Guard position is the position and posture adopted by the striker to receive a ball delivered by the bowler.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
FIELDERS
Fielding side is the side currently fielding, whether or not play is in progress.
Member of the fielding side is one of the players nominated by the captain of the fielding side, or any authorised replacement or substitute for such nominated player.
Fielder is one of the 11 or fewer players who together represent the fielding side on the field of play. This definition includes not only both the bowler and the wicket-keeper but also nominated players who are legitimately on the field of play, together with players legitimately acting as substitutes for absent nominated players. It excludes any
nominated player who is absent from the field of play, or who has been absent from the field of play and who has not yet obtained the umpire’s permission to return.
A player going briefly outside the boundary in the course of discharging his duties as a fielder is not absent from the field of play nor, for the purposes of clause 24.2 (Fielder absent or leaving the field of play), is he to be regarded as having left the field of play.
SUBSTITUTES
A Substitute is a player who takes the place of a fielder on the field of play, but does not replace the player for whom he substitutes on that side’s list of nominated players. A substitute’s activities are limited to fielding.
BOWLERS
Over the wicket/round the wicket – If, as the bowler runs up between the wicket and the return crease, the wicket is on the same side as his bowling arm, he is bowling over the wicket. If the return crease is on the same side as his bowling arm, he is bowling round the wicket.
Delivery swing is the motion of the bowler’s arm during which he normally releases the ball for a delivery.
Delivery stride is the stride during which the delivery swing is made, whether the ball is released or not. It starts when the bowler’s back foot lands for that stride and ends when the front foot lands in the same stride. The stride after the delivery stride is completed when the next foot lands, i.e. when the back foot of the delivery stride lands again.
The Illegal Bowling Regulations are the ICC’s regulations governing Illegal Bowling Actions.
An Illegal Bowling Action is a bowling action where a bowler’s Elbow Extension exceeds 15 degrees, measured from the point at which the bowling arm reaches the horizontal until the point at which the ball is released (any Elbow Hyperextension shall be discounted for the purposes of determining an Illegal Bowling Action).
Elbow Extension means the motion that occurs when a bowler’s arm moves from a flexed (bent) position at the elbow, to a more extended (straight) position (full Elbow Extension occurs when the arm is straight).
Elbow Hyperextension is the motion that occurs when a bowler’s elbow extends beyond the straight position.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
The ICC Bowling Action Report Form is the form provided for by Article 3 of the Illegal Bowling Regulations, by which an umpire and/or the ICC Match Referee may submit a report relating to a suspected Illegal Bowling Action.
THE BALL
The ball is struck/strikes the ball unless specifically defined otherwise, mean ‘the ball is struck by the bat’/‘strikes the ball with the bat’.
Rebounds directly/strikes directly and similar phrases mean ‘without contact with any fielder’ but do not exclude contact with the ground.
Full-pitch describes a ball delivered by the bowler that reaches or passes the striker without having touched the ground. Sometimes described as non-pitching.
RUNS
A run to be disallowed is one that in these Playing Conditions should not have been taken. It is not only to be cancelled but the batsmen are to be returned to their original ends.
A run not to be scored is one that is not illegal, but is not recognised as a properly executed run. It is not a run that has been made, so the
question of cancellation does not arise. The loss of the run so attempted is not a disallowance and the batsmen will not be returned to their original ends on that account.
THE PERSON
Person; A player’s person is his physical person (flesh and blood) together with any clothing or legitimate external protective equipment that he is wearing except, in the case of a batsman, his bat.
A hand, whether gloved or not, that is not holding the bat is part of the batsman’s person.
No item of clothing or equipment is part of the player’s person unless it is attached to him.
For a batsman, a glove being held but not worn is part of his person.
For a fielder, an item of clothing or equipment he is holding in his hand or hands is not part of his person.
Clothing – anything that a player is wearing, including such items as spectacles or jewellery, that is not classed as external protective equipment is classed as clothing, even though he may be wearing
some items of apparel, which are not visible, for protection. A bat being carried by a batsman does not come within this definition of clothing.
Hand for batsman or wicket-keeper shall include both the hand itself and the whole of a glove worn on the hand.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
OFF SIDE/ON SIDE; IN FRONT OF/ BEHIND THE POPPING CREASE
Behind the popping crease
Off side
Behind the popping crease On side (leg side)
WICKET-KEEPER
Right-handed striker
BOWLER
UMPIRE
In front of the popping crease
Off side
In front of the popping crease On side (leg side)
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX B
EQUIPMENT
THE BAT
General guidance
Measurements – All provisions in paragraphs 1.2 to 1.6 below are subject to the measurements and restrictions stated in the Playing Conditions and this Appendix.
Adhesives – Throughout, adhesives are permitted only where essential and only in minimal quantity.
Specifications for the Handle
One end of the handle is inserted into a recess in the blade as a means of joining the handle and the blade.
This lower portion is used purely for joining the blade and the handle together. It is not part of the blade but, solely in
interpreting paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4 below, references to the blade shall be considered to extend also to this lower portion of the handle where relevant.
The handle may be glued where necessary and bound with twine along the upper portion.
Providing clause 5.5 is not contravened, the upper portion may be covered with materials solely to provide a surface suitable for gripping. Such covering is an addition and is not part of the bat, except in relation to clause 5.6. The bottom of this grip should not extend below the point defined in paragraph 1.2.4 below.
Twine binding and the covering grip may extend beyond the junction of the upper and lower portions of the handle, to cover part of the shoulders of the bat as defined in paragraph 1.3.1.
No material may be placed on or inserted into the lower portion of the handle other than as permitted above together with the minimal adhesives or adhesive tape used solely for fixing these items, or for fixing the handle to the blade.
Materials in handle – As a proportion of the total volume of the handle, materials other than cane, wood or twine are restricted to one-tenth. Such materials must not project more than 3.25 in/8.26 cm into the lower portion of the handle
Binding and covering of handle – The permitted continuation beyond the junction of the upper and lower portions of the handle is restricted to a maximum, measured along the length of the handle, of:
2.5 in/6.35 cm in for the twine binding
2.75 in/6.99 cm for the covering grip.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Specifications for the Blade
The blade has a face, a back, a toe, sides and shoulders:
The face of the blade is its main striking surface and shall be flat or have a slight convex curve resulting from traditional pressing techniques. The back is the opposite surface.
The shoulders, sides and toe are the remaining surfaces, separating the face and the back.
The shoulders, one on each side of the handle, are along that portion of the blade between the first entry point of the handle and the point at which the blade first reaches its full width.
The toe is the surface opposite to the shoulders taken as a pair.
The sides, one each side of the blade, are along the rest of the blade, between the toe and the shoulders.
No material may be placed on or inserted into the blade other than as permitted in paragraph 1.2.4, paragraph 1.3.3, and clause
5.4 together with the minimal adhesives or adhesive tape used solely for fixing these items, or for fixing the handle to the blade.
Covering the blade. Bats shall have no covering on the blade except as permitted in clause 5.4.
Any materials referred to above, in clause 5.4 and paragraph 1.4 below, are to be considered as part of the bat, which must still pass through the gauge as defined in paragraph 1.6.
Protection and repair
The surface of the blade may be treated with non-solid materials to improve resistance to moisture penetration and/or mask natural blemishes in the appearance of the wood. Save for the purpose of giving a homogeneous appearance by masking natural blemishes, such treatment shall not materially alter the colour of the blade.
Materials can be used for protection and repair as stated in clause
5.4 and are additional to the blade. Note however clause 5.6.
Any such material shall not extend over any part of the back of the blade except in the case of clause 5.4.1 and then only when it is applied as a continuous wrapping covering the damaged area.
The repair material shall not extend along the length of the blade more than 0.79 in/2.0 cm in each direction beyond the limits of the damaged area. Where used as a continuous binding, any overlapping shall not breach the maximum of 0.04 in/0.1 cm in total thickness.
The use of non-solid material which when dry forms a hard layer more than 0.004 in/0.01 cm in thickness is not permitted.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Permitted coverings, repair material and toe guards, not exceeding their specified thicknesses, may be additional to the dimensions above, but the bat must still pass through the gauge as described in paragraph 1.6.
Commercial identifications
Such identifications shall comply with the restrictions set out in the Clothing and Equipment Regulations in relation to the size and position of marks and logos.
Bat Gauge
All bats must meet the specifications defined in clause 5.7. They must also, with or without protective coverings permitted in clause 5.4, be able to pass through a bat gauge, the dimensions and shape of which are shown in the following diagram:
Width 11.0cm
Depth 6.8cm
0.5cm
DIMENSIONS OF APERTURE
Total Depth: 2.68 in/6.8 cm Width: 4.33 in/11.0 cm Edge: 1.61 in/4.1 cm
Curve: 0.20 in/0.5 cm
Note: The curve of the lower edge of the aperture is an arc of a circle of radius 12.0 in/30.5 cm, whose centre is on the vertical centre line of the aperture.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
THE WICKETS
Bails
Overall 4.31 in/10.95 cm a = 1.38 in/3.50 cm
b = 2.13 in/5.40 cm c = 0.81 in/2.06 cm
Stumps
Height (d) = 28 in/71.1 cm
Diameter (e) – maximum = 1.5 in/3.81 cm; minimum = 1.38 in/3.50 cm
Overall
Width (f) of wicket 9 in/22.86 cm
a
d
e
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
WICKET-KEEPING GLOVES
The images below illustrate the requirements of clause 27.2 in relation to:
no webbing between the fingers;
a single piece of non-stretch material between finger and thumb as a means of support; and
when a hand wearing the glove has the thumb fully extended, the top edge being taut and not protruding beyond the straight line joining the top of the index finger to the top of the thumb.
Note also the requirement for wicket-keeping gloves to comply with the Clothing and Equipment Regulations in relation to the size and position of marks and logos.
5ft/1.52m
Minimum yards/13.71m
 
Protected Area Indicators
Popping Crease
22yds/20.12m
Wide Guidelines
Return Crease
Return Crease
Bowling Crease
Protected Area Indicators
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
2 RESTRICTION ON THE PLACEMENT OF FIELDERS
Continuous white line, or dots at 5 yard (4.5 metre) intervals
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
ADVERTISING ON GROUNDS, PERIMETER BOARDS AND SIGHT-SCREENS
Advertising on grounds
The logos on outfields are to be positioned as follows:
Behind the stumps – a minimum of 25.15 yards (23 meters) from the stumps.
Midwicket/cover area – no advertising to be positioned within 30 yards (27.50 meters) of the centre of the pitch being used for the match.
Note: Advertising closer to the stumps as set out above which is required to meet 3D requirements for broadcasters may be permitted, subject to prior ICC approval having been obtained.
Perimeter boards
Advertising on perimeter boards placed in front of the sight- screens is permitted save that the predominant colour of such advertising shall be of a contrasting colour to that of the ball.
Advertising on perimeter boards behind the stumps at both ends shall not contain moving, flashing or flickering images and operators should ensure that the images are only changed or moved at a time that will not be distracting to the players or the umpires.
The brightness of any electronic images shall be set at a level so that it is not a distraction to the players or umpires.
Sight-screens
Sight-screens shall be provided at both ends of all grounds.
Advertising shall be permitted on the sight-screen behind the striker, providing it is removed for the subsequent over from that end.
Such advertising shall not contain flashing or flickering images and particular care should be taken by the operators that the advertising is not changed at a time which is distracting to the umpire.
MARKINGS ON OUTFIELD
With the permission of the Ground Authority, a bowler may use paint to make a small marking on the outfield for the purposes of identifying their run-up. Paint used for this purpose shall be any colour other than white.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX D
DECISION REVIEW SYSTEM (DRS) AND THIRD UMPIRE PROTOCOL
GENERAL
Minimum requirements for use of DRS and appointment of third umpire:
Save with the express written consent of the ICC General Manager – Cricket, the Home Board shall ensure the live television broadcast of all ODI matches played in its country.
Where matches are broadcast, the camera specification set out below shall be mandatory as a minimum requirement.
Run Out Camera 1 
Run Out Camera 2 
  Run Out Camera 3 
Run Out Camera 4 
 
Where the camera specification set out above is provided, a third umpire shall be appointed to the match.
The provisions of paragraphs 1.1.1, 1.1.2, and 1.1.3 above shall not apply for matches between a Full Member country and Associate Member countries (whose matches have been granted ODI status) and for matches between such Associate Member countries.
If the minimum requirements for DRS to be used are satisfied, both participating Boards may agree to employ the DRS for an ODI. Otherwise, the third umpire shall be appointed and empowered to use broadcast replays to make decisions that are referred to him/ her in accordance with paragraph 2 (Umpire Reviews).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
The table below summarises the minimum requirements for DRS to be used, and the regulations around the appointment of the third umpire:
Minimum Requirement
Specification detailed in paragraph 1.1.2.
Technology.
Approved ball-tracking technology.
Approved
sound-based edge detection technology.
Third Umpire Appointment
From ICC Elite Panel or International Panel of umpires.
Not from the same country as either of the participating teams.
From ICC Elite Panel or International Panel of umpires.
Third Umpire Jurisdiction
Replays that can be used
edge detection technology, and heat-based edge detection technology)
shall not be used during Umpire Reviews.
ICC Technical Officer
at every series in which the DRS is used to assist the third umpire and to protect the integrity of the DRS process.
The Home Board shall ensure that a separate room is provided for the third umpire and that he/she has access to the television equipment and technology (where DRS is used) so as to be in the best position to facilitate the referral and/or consultation processes referred to in paragraphs 2 (Umpire Review) and 3 (Player Review) below.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
UMPIRE REVIEW
In the circumstances detailed in paragraphs 2.1, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 below, the on-field umpire shall have the discretion to refer the decision to the third umpire or, in the case of paragraphs 2.2, and 2.4, to consult with the third umpire before making the decision.
Save for requesting the umpire to review his/her decision under paragraph 3 (Player Review) below, players may not appeal to the on-field umpires to use the Umpire Review. Breach of this provision may constitute dissent and the player may be subject to disciplinary action under the ICC Code of Conduct for Players and Player Support Personnel.
Run Out, Stumped, Bowled and Hit Wicket Decisions
The relevant on-field umpire shall be entitled to refer an appeal for run-out, stumped, bowled or hit wicket to the third umpire.
An on-field umpire wishing to refer a decision to the third umpire shall signal to the third umpire by making the shape of a TV screen with his/her hands.
In the case of a referral of a bowled, hit wicket or stumped decision, the third umpire shall first check the fairness of the delivery (all modes of No ball except for the bowler using an Illegal Bowling Action, subject to the proviso that the third umpire may review whether the bowler has used a prohibited Specific Variation under Article 6.2 of the Illegal Bowling Regulations). If the delivery was not a fair delivery the third umpire shall indicate that the batsman is Not out and advise the on-field umpire to signal No ball. See also paragraph 2.5 below.
Additionally, if the third umpire finds the batsman is Out by another mode of dismissal (excluding LBW), or Not out by any mode of dismissal (excluding LBW), he/she shall notify the
on-field umpire so that the correct decision is made.
If the third umpire decides that the batsman is Out, a red light shall be displayed; if the third umpire decides that the batsman is Not out, a green light shall be displayed. Should the third umpire be temporarily unable to respond, a white light (where available) shall remain illuminated throughout the period of interruption
to signify to the on-field umpires that Umpire Reviews are temporarily unavailable, in which case the decision shall be taken by the on-field umpire. As an alternative to the red/green light system, the replay screen (where available) may be used for the purpose of conveying the third umpire’s decision, in line with the ICC Big Screen Policy.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Caught Decisions, Obstructing the Field
Where the bowler’s end umpire is unable to decide upon a Fair Catch or a Bump Ball, or if, on appeal from the fielding side, the batsman obstructed the field, he/she shall first consult with the striker’s end umpire.
Should both on-field umpires require assistance from the third umpire to make a decision, the bowler’s end umpire shall firstly take a decision on-field after consulting with the striker’s end umpire, before consulting by two-way radio with the third umpire. Such consultation shall be initiated by the bowler’s end umpire to the third umpire by making the shape of a TV screen with his/her hands, followed by a Soft Signal of Out or Not out made with the hands close to the chest at chest height. If the third umpire advises that the replay evidence is inconclusive, the on-field decision communicated at the start of the consultation process shall stand.
The third umpire shall determine whether the batsman has been caught, whether the delivery was a Bump Ball, or if the batsman obstructed the field. However, in reviewing the television replay(s), the third umpire shall first check the fairness of the delivery for all decisions involving a catch (all modes of No ball except for the bowler using an Illegal Bowling Action, subject to the proviso that the third umpire may review whether the bowler has used a prohibited Specific Variation under Article 6.2 of the Illegal Bowling Regulations) and whether the batsman has hit the ball. If the delivery was not a fair delivery or if it is clear to the third umpire that the batsman did not hit the ball he/she shall indicate to the bowler’s end umpire that the batsman is Not out caught, and in the case of an unfair delivery, advise the bowler’s end umpire to signal No ball. See also paragraph 2.5 below. Additionally, if it is clear to the third umpire that the batsman is Out by another mode of dismissal (excluding LBW), or Not out by any mode of dismissal (excluding LBW), he/she shall notify the bowler’s end umpire so that the correct decision can be made.
The third umpire shall communicate his/her decision as set out in paragraph 2.1.5.
Boundary Decisions
The bowler’s end umpire shall be entitled to refer to the third umpire for a decision on:
whether a four or six has been scored;
whether a fielder had any part of his person in contact with the ball when he touched the boundary; or
whether the fielder had any part of his person in contact with the ball when he had any part of his person grounded beyond the boundary.
A decision shall be made immediately and cannot be changed thereafter.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
If the television evidence is inconclusive as to whether or not a boundary has been scored, the default presumption shall be in favour of no boundary being awarded.
Where the bowler’s end umpire wishes to use the assistance of the third umpire in this circumstance, he/she shall communicate with the third umpire by use of a two-way radio and the third umpire shall convey his decision to the bowler’s end umpire by the same method.
The third umpire may initiate contact with the on-field umpire by two-way radio if TV coverage shows a boundary line infringement or incident that appears not to have been acted upon by the on-field umpires.
Batsmen Running to the Same End
Where both batsmen have run to the same end and the on-field umpires are uncertain over which batsman made his ground first, the on-field umpires may consult with the third umpire.
The procedure set out in paragraph 2.3.4 shall apply.
No Balls
If the bowler’s end umpire is uncertain as to the fairness of the delivery following a dismissal, either affecting the validity of the dismissal or which batsman is dismissed, he/she shall be entitled to request the batsman to delay leaving the field and to check the fairness of the delivery with the third umpire. Communication with the third umpire shall be by two-way radio.
The third umpire shall check all modes of No ball except for the bowler using an Illegal Bowling Action (subject to the proviso that the third umpire may review whether the bowler has used a prohibited Specific Variation under Article 6.2 of the Illegal Bowling Regulations). The third umpire shall apply clause 21.5 when deciding whether a No ball should have been called (and must therefore be satisfied that none of the three conditions in clause 21.5 have been met before calling a No ball).
If the delivery was not a fair delivery, the bowler’s end umpire shall indicate that the batsman is Not out and signal No ball (except in the case of a dismissal for obstructing the field, which may still be effected despite a No ball being called, in which case the bowler’s end umpire shall indicate that the relevant batsman is Out and additionally call a No ball).
If a No ball is called following the check by the third umpire, the batting side shall benefit from the reversal of the dismissal and the one run for the No ball, but shall not benefit from any runs that may subsequently have accrued from the delivery had the on-field umpire originally called a No ball. Where the batsmen crossed while the ball was in the air before being caught, the batsmen shall remain at the same ends as if the striker had been dismissed, but no runs shall be credited to the striker even if one (or more) runs were completed prior to the catch being taken.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Cameras On or Over the Field of Play
The on-field umpires shall be entitled to refer to the third umpire for a decision as to whether the ball has at any time during the normal course of play come into contact with any part of the camera, its apparatus or its cables above the playing area, as contemplated in clause 20.1.3.
Where an on-field umpire wishes to use the assistance of the third umpire in this circumstance, he/she shall communicate with the third umpire by use of a two-way radio and the third umpire shall convey his/her decision to the bowler’s end umpire by the same method.
A decision shall be made immediately and cannot be changed thereafter. If the television evidence is inconclusive as to whether or not the ball has come into contact with any part of the camera, its apparatus or its cables above the playing area, the default presumption shall be in favour of no contact having been made.
The third umpire may initiate contact with the on-field umpire by two-way radio if TV coverage shows the ball to have been in contact with any part of the camera or its cables above the playing area as envisaged under this paragraph.
PLAYER REVIEW
The following paragraphs shall operate in addition to and in conjunction with paragraph 2 (Umpire Review).
Circumstances in which a Player Review may be requested
A player may request a review of any decision taken by the on-field umpires concerning whether or not a batsman is dismissed, with the exception of ‘Timed Out’ (Player Review).
No other decisions made by the umpires are eligible for a Player Review with the exception of Fair Catch/Bump Ball (even after the third umpire has been consulted and the decision communicated).
Only the batsman involved in a dismissal may request a Player Review of an Out decision and only the captain (or acting captain) of the fielding team may request a Player Review of a Not out decision.
A decision concerning whether or not a batsman is dismissed that could have been the subject of a Umpire Review under paragraph 2 is eligible for a Player Review as soon as it is clear that the
on-field umpire has chosen not to initiate the Umpire Review.
The manner of requesting the Player Review
The request shall be made by the player making a ‘T’ sign with both forearms at head height.
The total time elapsed between the ball becoming dead and the review request being made shall be no more than 15 seconds. The only exception permitted shall be when an Umpire Review for Fair Catch or Bump Ball (as permitted in paragraph 2.2 above) is required to answer an appeal for a caught decision, in which
case either team is able to request a Player Review of that caught
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
decision within 15 seconds of the decision being communicated. The bowler’s end umpire shall provide the relevant player with a prompt after 10 seconds if the request has not been made at that time and the player shall request the review immediately thereafter. If the on-field umpires believe that a request has not
been made within the 15 second time limit, they shall decline the request for a Player Review.
The captain may consult with the bowler and other fielders, and the two batsmen may consult with each other prior to deciding whether to request a Player Review. Under no circumstances
is any player permitted to query an umpire about any aspect of a decision before deciding on whether or not to request a
Player Review. If the on-field umpires believe that the captain or either batsman has received direct or indirect input emanating other than from the players on the field, then they may at their discretion decline the request for a Player Review. In particular, signals from the dressing room must not be given.
No replays, either at normal speed or slow motion, shall be shown on a big screen to spectators until the 15 second time limit allowed for requesting a Player Review has elapsed. The only exception to this provision is where a Player Review of a caught decision is requested after the Umpire Review of a Fair Catch or Bump Ball has concluded, as detailed in paragraph 3.2.2 above (due to the fact that replays may have been shown on the big screen during that Umpire Review process).
Where either on-field umpire initiates an Umpire Review, this does not preclude a player seeking a Player Review of a separate incident from the same delivery. The request for a Player Review may be made after the Umpire Review, provided the request is still within the 15 second time limit described in paragraph 3.2.2 above. (See paragraphs 3.9.2 and 3.9.3 below for the process for addressing both an Umpire and Player Review).
A request for a Player Review cannot be withdrawn once it has been made.
The process of consultation
On receipt of an eligible and timely request for a Player Review, the relevant on-field umpire shall make the sign of a shape of a TV screen with his/her hands in the normal way.
The relevant on-field umpire shall initiate communication with the third umpire by confirming;
That a Player Review has been requested,
The mode of dismissal for which the relevant on-field umpire adjudicated the appeal,
The decision that has been made (Out or Not out), and;
For LBW appeals, where relevant, if the bowler’s end umpire believed that the striker made no genuine attempt to play the ball with the bat (the default presumption of the third umpire in the absence of any information on
this point from the bowler’s end umpire shall be that a genuine attempt to play the ball with the bat was made).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
A two-way consultation process shall begin to investigate whether there is anything that the third umpire can see or hear which would indicate that the on-field umpire should change his/ her original decision.
The third umpire shall not withhold any factual information which may help in the decision making process. In particular, in reviewing a dismissal, if the third umpire believes that the
batsman may instead be Out by any other mode of dismissal, he/ she shall advise the on-field umpire accordingly. The process of consultation described in this paragraph in respect of such other mode of dismissal shall then be conducted as if the batsman has been given Not out.
The third umpire shall initially check all modes of No ball except for the bowler using an Illegal Bowling Action (subject to the proviso that the third umpire may review whether the bowler has used a prohibited Specific Variation under Article 6.2 of the Illegal Bowling Regulations), where appropriate advising the on-field umpire accordingly.
If despite the available technology, the third umpire is unable to decide with a high degree of confidence whether the original on-field decision should be changed, then he/she shall report that the replays are ‘inconclusive’, and that the on-field decision shall stand. The third umpire shall not give answers conveying likelihoods or probabilities.
In circumstances where the television technology (all or parts thereof) is not available to the third umpire or fails for whatever reason, the third umpire shall advise the on-field umpire of this fact but still provide any relevant factual information that
may be ascertained from the available television replays and other technology.
The on-field umpire shall then make his/her decision based on the information provided by the third umpire, any other factual information offered by the third umpire and his/her recollection and opinion of the original incident.
The on-field umpire shall reverse his/her decision if the nature
of the supplementary information received from the third umpire leads him/her to conclude that his/her original decision
was incorrect.
Review of LBW Decisions
In assessing whether a batsman is Out LBW in accordance with clause 36, the third umpire shall first judge whether the delivery is fair (as set out in clause 36.1.1), and second, whether or not the ball has touched the bat before being intercepted by any part of the striker’s person (as set out in clause 36.1.3).
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
If the batsman is still eligible to be Out, the ball-tracking technology shall then present three pieces of information to the third umpire relating to the path of the ball:
The point of pitching (where applicable) (PITCHING).
The position of the ball at the point of first. interception (IMPACT).
Whether the ball would have hit the wicket (WICKET).
This Decision Review System (DRS) and Third Umpire Protocol includes a category of Umpire’s Call, which shall be the conclusion reported where the technology indicates a marginal decision in respect of either the point of first interception or whether the ball would have hit the stumps.
PITCHING
The interpretation of “pitches in line between wicket and wicket” in clause 36.1.2 shall refer to the position of the centre of the ball at the point of pitching, in relation to the Pitching Zone.
The Pitching Zone is defined as a two dimensional area on the pitch between both sets of stumps with its boundaries consisting of the base of both sets of stumps and a line between the outside of the outer stumps at each end.
Where applicable, the ball-tracking technology shall report that the ball pitched in one of the following three areas in relation to the Pitching Zone:
In Line
Outside Off
Outside Leg
Subject to the satisfaction of the other elements of clause 36, the batsman can be Out if the ball-tracking technology reports that the ball pitched Outside Off or In Line, but the batsman shall be Not out if the ball pitched Outside Leg.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
IMPACT
The interpretation of “the (first) point of impact, even if in above the level of the bails, is between wicket and wicket” in clause 36.1.4 shall refer to the position of the ball at the point of first interception, in relation to the Impact Zone.
The Impact Zone is defined as a three dimensional space extending between both wickets to an indefinite height and with its boundaries consisting of a line between the outside of the outer stumps at each end.
The ball-tracking technology shall report that the point of first interception was in one of the following categories in relation to the Impact Zone:
In Line
Umpire’s Call
Outside
Where a Not out decision is being reviewed, and it is judged that the batsman has made a genuine attempt to play the ball, the ball-tracking technology must report that the point of first interception was In Line for the batsman to be eligible to be given Out, otherwise the batsman shall remain Not out.
Where a Not out decision is being reviewed, and it is judged that the batsman has made no genuine attempt to play the ball, the ball-tracking technology must report that the point of impact was In Line, or Umpire’s Call (off side), or Outside (off) for the batsman to be eligible to be given Out, otherwise the batsman shall remain Not out.
Where an Out decision is being reviewed, and it is judged that the batsman has made a genuine attempt to play the ball, the ball-tracking technology must report that the point of first interception was Outside for
the decision to be reversed to Not out, otherwise the batsman shall remain eligible to be given Out.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
3.4.5.7 Where an Out decision is being reviewed, and it is judged that the batsman has made no genuine attempt to play the ball, the ball-tracking technology must report that the point of first interception was Outside (leg) for the decision to be reversed to Not out, otherwise the batsman shall remain eligible to be given Out.
WICKET
The interpretation of whether “the ball would have hit the wicket” in clause 36.1.5 shall refer to position of the ball as it either hits or passes the wicket, in relation to the Wicket Zone.
The Wicket Zone is defined as a two dimensional area whose boundaries are the outside of the outer stumps, the base of the stumps and the bottom of the bails.
The ball-tracking technology shall report whether the ball would have hit the wicket with reference to the following three categories:
Hitting
Umpire’s Call
Missing
Where a Not out decision is being reviewed, the ball- tracking technology must report that the ball was Hitting for the batsman to be eligible to be given Out, otherwise the batsman shall remain Not out.
However, where the evidence shows that the ball was Hitting, the point of first interception was In Line, and the ball pitched In Line or Outside Off, but that:
The point of first interception was 300cm or more from the stumps; or
The point of first interception was more than 250cm but less than 300cm from the stumps and the distance between the point of pitching and the point of first interception was less than 40cm,
the on-field decision shall stand (that is, Not out).
Where an Out decision is being reviewed, the
ball-tracking technology must report that the ball was Missing for the on-field decision to be reversed to Not out, otherwise the batsman shall remain eligible to be given Out.
When the ball strikes the batsman on the full, and the evidence provided by the ball-tracking technology indicates that the ball would have pitched before striking or passing the wicket, there will be no information available from that delivery that will allow the ball-tracking technology to accurately predict the height of the ball after pitching.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
With regard to determining whether the ball would have hit the wicket under these circumstances, the ball-tracking technology shall project the line of the ball in accordance with clause 36.2.3 (it is to be assumed that the path of the ball before interception would have continued after interception, irrespective of whether the ball might have pitched subsequently or not), and display the simulated path of the ball from directly above the wicket.
The third umpire shall advise the bowler’s end umpire only on the point of first interception and whether the ball would have hit the stumps (in line with the process set out in paragraph 3.4 above), but shall make no comment on the predicted height
of the ball after pitching, which shall remain a judgment of the bowler’s end umpire.
The process for communicating the final decision
For Player Reviews concerning potential dismissals, the relevant on-field umpire shall indicate Out by raising his/her finger above his/her head in a normal yet prominent manner or indicate Not out by the call of ‘not out’ and by crossing his/her hands in a horizontal position side to side in front and above his/her waist three times. Where the decision is a reversal of the on-field umpire’s previous decision, he/she shall make the ‘revoke last signal’ indication immediately prior to the above.
If the mode of dismissal is not obvious or not the same as that on which the original decision was based, then the umpire shall advise the scorers via the third umpire.
Number of Player Review requests permitted
In each innings, each team shall be allowed to make a maximum of one Player Review request that is categorised as ‘Unsuccessful’ (as set out in paragraph 3.6.3 below).
Where a request for a Player Review results in the original
on-field decision being reversed, then the Player Review shall be categorised as ‘Successful’ and shall not count towards the innings limit.
Where a request for a Player Review results in the original on-field decision remaining unchanged (other than in the
circumstances set out in paragraphs 3.6.4, 3.6.6 or 3.6.8), the Player Review shall be categorised as ’Unsuccessful’.
Where a request for a Player Review of an LBW decision results in the on-field decision remaining unchanged solely on the basis of an Umpire’s Call, the Player Review shall be categorised as ‘Unchanged – Umpire’s Call’. A Player Review categorised as ‘Unchanged – Umpire’s Call’ shall not count towards the innings limit set out in paragraph 3.6.1.
Where, following a request for a Player Review, the original
on-field decision of Out is unchanged, but for a different mode of dismissal from the original on-field decision, then the Player Review shall still be categorised as ’Unsuccessful’.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Where, following a request for a Player Review, the original on-field decision of Not out is unchanged on account of the delivery being a No ball (for any reason), thereby not requiring any further evaluation, the Player Review shall not be counted as ‘Unsuccessful’ and accordingly shall not count towards the innings limit set out in paragraph 3.6.1.
Where a Player Review and an Umpire Review are requested from the same delivery and the decision of the third umpire from the Umpire Review renders the Player Review unnecessary (see paragraphs 3.9.2 and 3.9.3), the Player Review request shall be disregarded and accordingly shall not count towards the innings limit set out in paragraph 3.6.1.
A Player Review categorised as ‘Unsuccessful’ may be reinstated by the ICC Match Referee at his/her sole discretion (if appropriate after consultation with the ICC Technical Official and/or the television broadcast director) if the Player Review could not properly be concluded due to a failure of the technology. Any such decision shall be final and shall be taken as soon as possible, being communicated to both teams once all the relevant facts have been ascertained by the ICC Match Referee. A Player Review categorised as ‘Unsuccessful’ shall not be reinstated if, despite any technical failures, the correct decision could still have been made using the other available technology. Similarly, a Player Review categorised as ‘Unsuccessful’ shall not be reinstated where the technology worked as intended, but the evidence gleaned from its use was inconclusive.
The third umpire shall be responsible for counting the number Player Reviews categorised as ‘Unsuccessful’ and shall advise the on-field umpires once either team has exhausted their allowance for the innings.
The scoreboard shall display, for the innings in progress, the number of Player Reviews remaining available to each team.
CATEGORY OF PLAYER REVIEW
Successful (paragraph 3.6.2)
Unsuccessful (paragraphs 3.6.3
and 3.6.5)
Unchanged – Umpire’s Call (paragraph 3.6.4)
No ball – no evaluation required (paragraph 3.6.6)
Failure of technology (paragraph 3.6.8)
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Dead ball
If following a Player Review request, an original decision of Out is changed to Not out, then the ball is still deemed to have
become dead when the original decision was made (as per clause 20.1.1.3). The batting side, while benefiting from the reversal of the dismissal, shall not benefit from any runs that may subsequently have accrued from the delivery had the on-field umpire originally made a Not out decision, other than any No ball penalty that could arise under paragraph 3.3.5 above.
If an original decision of Not out is changed to Out, the ball shall retrospectively be deemed to have become dead from the
moment of the dismissal event. All subsequent events, including any runs scored, shall be ignored.
Use of technology
The following technology may be used by the third umpire during a Player Review:
Replays, at any speed, from any available broadcast camera
Sound from the stump microphones with the replays at normal speed and slow motion
Approved ball-tracking technology:
HawkEye (HawkEye Innovations), or;
VirtualEye (ARL)
Approved sound-based edge detection technology:
Real-Time Snickometer (BBG Sports), or;
UltraEdge (HawkEye Innovations)
Approved heat-based edge detection technology:
Hot Spot cameras (BBG Sports)
LED Wickets (using the lights to indicate if the wicket is broken, as set out in paragraph 4.2):
Zing Bails and Stumps
In addition, other forms of technology may be used subject to the ICC being satisfied that the required standards of accuracy and time efficiency can be met.
Where practical usage or further testing indicates that any of the above forms of technology cannot reliably provide accurate and timely information, then it may be removed prior to or during a match. The final decision regarding the technology to be used
in a given match shall be taken by the ICC Match Referee in consultation with the ICC Technical Official, ICC management and the competing teams’ governing bodies.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Combining Umpire Review with Player Review
If an Umpire Review (under paragraph 2) and a request for a Player Review (under paragraph 3) are made following the same delivery but relating to separate modes of dismissal, the following process shall apply.
The Umpire Review shall be carried out prior to the Player Review if all of the following conditions apply:
The Player Review has been requested by the fielding side.
The Umpire Review and the Player Review both relate to the dismissal of the same batsman.
If the batsman is out, the number of runs scored from the delivery would be the same for both modes of dismissal.
If the batsman is out, the batsman on strike for the next delivery would be the same for both modes of dismissal.
If the Umpire Review leads the third umpire to make a decision of Out, then this shall be displayed in the usual manner and the Player Review shall not be undertaken. If the Umpire Review results in a Not out decision, then the third umpire shall make no public decision but shall proceed to address the request for a Player Review.
For illustration, following an LBW appeal which is given Not out by the bowler’s end umpire, the striker sets off for a run, is sent back and there is an appeal for his run out. The players request that the LBW decision is reviewed and the umpires request that the run out be reviewed. The four criteria above are satisfied, so the run out referral is determined first. Should the appeal for run out be Out, then there is no requirement for the LBW review to take place.
In all other circumstances, the incidents shall be addressed in chronological order. If the conclusion from the first incident is that a batsman is dismissed, then the ball would be deemed to have become dead at that point, rendering investigation of the second incident unnecessary.
INTERPRETATION OF PLAYING CONDITIONS
When using a replay to determine the moment at which the wicket has been put down (as per clause 29.1), the third umpire shall deem this to be the first frame in which one of the bails is shown (or can be deduced) to have lost all contact with the top of the stumps and subsequent frames show the bail permanently removed from the top of the stumps.
Where LED Wickets are used (as provided for in paragraph 3.8.1.6) the moment at which the wicket has been put down (as per clause 29.1) shall be deemed to be the first frame in which the LED lights are
illuminated and subsequent frames show the bail permanently removed from the top of the stumps.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX E
CALCULATIONS
Table 1: Calculation sheet for use when a delay or interruptions occur in the First Innings
Time
Net playing time available at start of the match
Time innings in progress
Playing time lost
Extra time available
Time made up from reduced interval
Effective playing time lost [C – (D + E)]
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
Remaining playing time available (A - F)
G divided by 4.2 (to 2 decimal places)
Max overs per team [H/2] (round up fractions)
Maximum overs per bowler [I/5]
Duration of Powerplay Overs
(initial, batting side)
Rescheduled Playing Hours
First session to commence or recommence
Length of innings [I x 4.2] (round up fractions)
Second innings commencement time [L + M]
Ensure that the match is not finishing earlier than the original or rescheduled cessation time by applying clause 13.7.2. If so, add at least one over to each team and recalculate (I) to (O) above to prevent this from happening.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
Table 2: Calculation sheet to check whether an interruption during the First Innings should terminate the innings
Proposed re-start time
Rescheduled cut-off time allowing for full use
of any extra time provision
Minutes between P and Q
If S is less than or equal to T then the first innings is terminated – go to Table 3
Table 3: Calculation sheet for the start of the Second Innings
Maximum overs to be bowled:
(If first innings was terminated, S from Table 2)
Scheduled cessation time [C + B]
Overs per bowler and fielding restrictions
Maximum overs per bowler [A/5]
Duration of Powerplay overs
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Table 4: Calculation sheet for use when interruption occurs after the start of the Second Innings
Time
Time at start of innings
Time at start of interruption
Time innings in progress
Restart time
Length of interruption [D – B]
Additional time available:
or for earlier than scheduled start of second innings)
Total playing time lost [E – F]
Overs
Maximum overs at start of innings
Overs lost [G/4.2] (rounded down)
Adjusted maximum length of innings [H – I]
Overs per bowler and Fielding Restrictions
Maximum overs per bowler [J/5]
Duration of Powerplay overs
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX F
BONUS POINT SYSTEM
1 bonus point for any team that achieves victory with a run rate 1.25 times that of the opposition.
A team’s run rate shall be calculated by reference to the number of runs scored divided by the number of overs/balls faced.
Where a team is all out, the number of overs to be used is the maximum number of overs that team was otherwise eligible to face.
Where matches are shortened and targets revised through the application of the Duckworth/Lewis/Stern system, bonus run rates and bonus defensive targets are derived as a function of the revised target score (less one run) and maximum overs.
Whenever a target, or revised target, is set, the exact number of overs/balls within which the team batting second must achieve this target in order to gain the bonus point shall be communicated to the teams and announced by the Ground Authority. Once these overs/balls have been bowled, if the target has not then been achieved the bonus point cannot be gained by any subsequent event, e.g. a multiple scoring shot, or extras.
Examples of criteria for the award of bonus points:
TEAM BATTING FIRST
SCORE
Note: the ‘target score’ shown in the last column is the maximum total that the team batting second can make for the team batting first to qualify for the bonus point.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX G
APPLICATION OF THE RESERVE DAY
The hours of play on the Reserve Day shall be the same as on the scheduled day for the match (including the extra time provision).
If play is interrupted on the scheduled day, the umpires shall use the available extra time and, if necessary, reduce the number of overs to try to achieve a result on that day.
Each team must have had the opportunity to bat for a minimum of 20 overs for a result to be achieved. If play has not resumed by the cut-off time required to allow the minimum number of overs to be bowled to achieve a result on the scheduled day, play shall be abandoned for the day and the Reserve Day shall be used to complete the match.
On the Reserve Day, play shall recommence under the same assumption that the last ball was bowled on the scheduled day.
The match starts when the coin toss takes place and teams are exchanged. If the toss occurs on the scheduled day and there is no play thereafter, the result of the toss and the named teams shall be carried through to the Reserve Day.
In making their decisions in relation to ground, weather and light, the umpires shall aim to maximize play on the scheduled day of the match in order to achieve a result on that day, as if there was no Reserve Day available.
The treatment of the pitch on the Reserve Day by the Ground Authority shall be as follows:
Covering and removal of covers – as for the scheduled day of the match under clause 10 of the Playing Conditions; and
Mowing and rolling – as for Day 2 of a Test Match, under clause 9 of the ICC Test Match Playing Conditions.
Example 1: Match starts at 50 overs per side and there is an interruption at 19 overs. Overs are reduced to 46 overs per side and play is about to resume. Before another ball is bowled it rains and play is abandoned for the day. As the match did not resume under the revised overs, the match should continue on the Reserve Day at the original 50 overs per side with the overs reduced if necessary during the Reserve Day.
Example 2: The same start as in example 1 i.e. match starts at 50 overs per side and there is an interruption at 19 overs. Overs are reduced to 46 overs per side and play is about to resume. This time, play starts and after an over has been bowled it rains and play is abandoned for the day. As the match has resumed, it is continued on the Reserve Day at 46 overs per side with the overs further reduced if necessary during the Reserve Day.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL
PLAYING CONDITIONS
APPENDIX H
USE OF ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT
The use of electronic communication devices and equipment of any kind to communicate with players on the field of play shall not be permitted.
ICC MEN’S ONE DAY INTERNATIONAL PLAYING CONDITIONS
Welcome to the greatest game of all – Cricket. This site will help explain to an absolute beginner some of the basic rules of cricket.

Although there are many more rules in cricket than in many other sports, it is well worth your time learning them as it is a most rewarding sport.

Whether you are looking to play in the backyard with a mate or join a club Cricket-Rules will help you learn the basics and begin to enjoy one of the most popular sports in the world.

The game is ever popular, with many fans attending to watch their local and national teams, the craze is always growing. With a number of big tournaments like The Ashes, IPL League and the granddaddy of them all, the ICC World Cup Cricket 2019! The game of cricket is highly popular, and the number of cricket betting fans who place bets on their national and local teams is also growing.

A typical cricket field
A typical cricket field

Cricket is a game played with a bat and ball on a large field, known as a ground, between two teams of 11 players each.

The object of the game is to score runs when at bat and to put out, or dismiss, the opposing batsmen when in the field. The cricket rules displayed on this page here are for the traditional form of cricket which is called “Test Cricket”.

However there are other formats of the game eg. 50 over matches, Twenty20 Cricket etc where the rules differ slightly.

Player: Official Cricket Rules
Cricket is a game played between two teams made up of eleven players each. There is also a reserve player called a “twelfth man” who is used should a player be injured during play.

The twelfth man is not allowed to bowl, bat, wicket keep or captain the team. His sole duty is to act as a substitute fielder.

The original player is free to return to the game as soon as they have recovered from their injury.

To apply the law and make sure the cricket rules are upheld throughout the game there are two umpires in place during games. Umpires are responsible for making decisions and notifying the scorers of these decisions.

Two umpires are in place on the playing field while there is also a third umpire off the field who is in charge of video decisions.

This is where the call is too close for the on field umpires and they refer it to the third umpire who reviews slow motion video replays to make a decision.

Game Structure
Fielding positions in cricket for a right-handed batsman
Fielding positions in cricket for a right-handed batsman

Test cricket is a game that spans over two innings. This means that one team needs to bowl the other team out twice and score more runs then them to win the match. Another key difference between test cricket and other forms of cricket is the length of the innings. In test cricket there is no limit to the innings length. Whereas in one day cricket & Twenty20 cricket there are a certain amount of overs per innings. The only limits in test cricket is a 5 day length. Before the game begins an official will toss a coin. The captain who guesses the correct side of the coin will then choose if they want to bat or field first. One team will then bat while the other will bowl & field. The aim of the batting team is to score runs while the aim of the fielding team is to bowl ten people out and close the batting teams’ innings. Although there are eleven people in each team only ten people need to be bowled out as you cannot have one person batting alone. Batting is done in pairs.

Once the first team has been bowled out the second team would then go into bat. Once the second team is then bowled out it would normally return to the first team batting again. However there is an exception to this in the cricket rules, it is called the follow-on. The follow-on is when the first team makes at least 200 runs more than the second team made (in a 5 day test match). This then gives the first team the option to make the second team bat again. This is particularly useful if the game is progressing slowly or affected by bad weather and there might not be enough time for both teams to play a full innings. Should this be the case the batting team’s captain also has the right to forfeit their innings at any time. This is called a declaration. Some may wonder why a captain would forfeit the opportunity for his team to bat. However if the game is coming close to a close and it looks like they will not be able to bowl the other team out again this could be an option. If one team is not bowled out twice and a winner determined in the five days of play the game is declared a draw. Therefore it may be worth declaring an innings to creat the possibility of a win rather than a draw.

Ways to score runs
The aim of the batsmen is to score runs. One of the main cricket rules is that for batsmen to score runs they must run to each other’s end of the pitch (from one end to the other). In doing this one run is scored. Cricket rules state they may run multiple runs per shot. As well as running they can also score runs by hitting boundaries. A boundary scores the batsmen either 4 or 6 runs. A four is scored by hitting the ball past the boundary after hitting the ground while a six is scored by hitting the ball past the boundary on the full (before it hits the ground). Cricket rules also state that once a 4 or 6 has been scored any runs physically ran by the batsman are null & void. They will only obtain the 4 or 6 runs.

Other ways runs can be scored according to the cricket rules include no balls, wide balls, byes & leg byes. Cricket rules state that all runs scored by these methods are awarded to the batting team but not the individual batters.

A “No Ball” can be declared for many reasons: If the bowler bowls the ball from the wrong place, the ball is declared dangerous (often happens when bowled at the batsmen’s body on the full), bounces more than twice or rolls before reaching the batsman or if fielders are standing in illegal positions. The batsman can hit a no ball and score runs off it but cannot be out from a no ball except if they are ran out, hit the ball twice, handle the ball or obstruct the field. The batsman gains any runs scored off the no ball for his shot while the team also gains one run for the no ball itself.
A “Wide Ball” will be declared if the umpire thinks the batsman did not have a reasonable opportunity to score off the delivery. However if the delivery is bowled over the batsmen’s head it will not be declared a wide but a no ball. Umpires are much stricter on wide deliveries in the shorter format of the game while being much more relaxed in test cricket. A wide delivery will add one run to the batting team and any runs scored by the batsman. The batsman is not able to get out off a wide delivery except if they are stumped, run out, handle the ball, hit their wicket or obstruct the field.
A “Bye” is where a ball that isn’t a no ball or wide passes the striking batsman and runs are scored without the batsman hitting the ball.
A “Leg Bye” is where runs are scored by hitting the batsman, but not the bat and the ball is not a no ball or wide. However no runs can be scored if the striking batsman didn’t attempt to play a shot or if he was avoiding the ball.
Ways Batsmen can be given out according to cricket rules
There are a number of different ways a batsman can be given out in the game of cricket. When a bowler gets a batsman out it is said that the bowler gets a “wicket”. Following are the different ways a batsman can be given out according to the rules of cricket:

Bowled – Cricket rules state that if the ball is bowled and hits the striking batsman’s wickets the batsman is given out (as long as at least one bail is removed by the ball). It does not matter whether the ball has touched the batsman’s bat, gloves, body or any other part of the batsman. However the ball is not allowed to have touched another player or umpire before hitting the wickets.
Caught – Cricket rules state that if a batsman hits the ball or touches the ball at all with his bat or hand/glove holding the bat then the batsman can be caught out. This is done by the fielders, wicket keeper or bowler catching the ball on the full (before it bounces). If this is done then cricket rules state the batsman is out.
Leg Before Wicket (LBW) – If the ball is bowled and it hits the batsman first without the bat hitting it then an LBW decision is possible. However for the umpire to give this out he must first look at some of the factors stated in the cricket rules. The first thing the umpire need to decide is would the ball have hit the wickets if the batsman was not there. If his answer to this is yes and the ball was not pitched on the leg side of the wicket he can safely give the batsman out. However if the ball hits the batsman outside the line of off stump while he was attempting to play a stroke then he is not out.
Stumped – A batsman can be given out according to cricket rules when the wicketkeeper puts down his wicket while he is out of his crease and not attempting a run (if he is attempting a run it would be a runout).
Run Out – Cricket rules state that a batsman is out if no part of his bat or body is grounded behind the popping crease while the ball is in play and the wicket is fairly put down by the fielding side.
Hit Wicket – Cricket rules specify that if a batsman hits his wicket down with his bat or body after the bowler has entered his delivery stried and the ball is in play then he is out. The striking batsman is also out if he hits his wicket down while setting off for his first run.
Handled The Ball – Cricket rules allow the batsman to be given out if he willingly handles the ball with the hand that is not touching the bat without the consent of the opposition.
Timed Out – An incoming batsman must be ready to face a ball or be at the non strikers end with his partner within three minutes of the outgoing batsman being dismissed. If this is not done the incoming batsman can be given out.
Hit The Ball Twice – Cricket rules state that if a batsman hits a ball twice other than for the purpose of protecting his wicket or with consent from the opposition he is out.
Obstructing The Field – A batsman is out if he willingly obstructs the opposition by word or action
There are many other cricket rules. However these are most of the basics and will get you well on your way to playing the game. Many of the more advanced rules & laws can be learned along the way and are not vital to general play.